 It was one of the best and worst times in history. It was a time of great intelligence and ignorance, belief and disbelief, good and evil, hope and hopelessness. We had everything to live for, and we had nothing to live for. Everyone was going straight to Heaven and straight to hell. Basically, it was just like   the present 1859, the time at which Dickens was writing  the present , with experts of the time insisting on seeing its events only in terms of contrasting extremes.             

 A stern-looking king and a plain-looking queen ruled England. A stern-looking king and a beautiful queen ruled France. In both countries, it seemed obvious to the people managing the royal food supplies that things were stable and nothing would ever change.              

 It was 1775. People in England were as superstitious then as they are now.   Mrs. Southcott a woman who claimed to be a prophet  Mrs. Southcott  had just turned twenty-five, and a private in the British army who claimed he could tell the future announced her appearance by saying that London and Westminster would be destroyed. Even the   Cock Lane Ghost the ghost of a woman believed to haunt a house on Cock Lane  Cock Lane Ghost  had only been gone twelve years since last tapping out its messages, as the very unoriginal ghosts of last year tapped out theirs. A   group of British subjects in the American colonies the First Continental Congress  group of British subjects in the American colonies  had recently sent messages to the King of England, and oddly enough, these earthly messages proved more important than any of the supernatural ones from Cock Lane.             

 France, which was less interested in spiritual matters than England, was headed straight toward disaster, printing lots of paper money and spending all of it. Under the leadership of the clergy, the French government entertained itself with such activities as cutting off a young manís hands, pulling his tongue out with pliers, and burning him alive. The French government did this because the man didnít kneel down in the rain to pay tribute to a group of dirty monks walking by fifty or sixty yards away. While this young man was being put to death, trees were growing in the forests of France and Norway that Fate had decided would one day be used to make the guillotines that would play a terrible role in history. Itís likely too that on the crude farms near Paris sat rough, filthy carts, which pigs snuffed around and poultry roosted in, that Death had decided would be used during the Revolution to cart people to the guillotine. Though Fate and Death work constantly, they also work quietly, so no one heard them as they went sneaking around. Instead, if a person even suggested that bad times were on the way, he would be accused of being an atheist and a traitor.          

 England didnít have much law and order to brag about, either. Even in London, armed bandits broke into peopleís houses and travelers were robbed on the highways every night. Families were warned to lock their furniture away in storehouses before leaving town. The man who was a highway robber at night was a businessman during the day, and when the man he robbed recognized and confronted him, the robber shot him in the head and rode away. Seven robbers once attacked a mail coach, and a policeman shot three of them dead. But he was then shot by the other four when his weapon failed to go off. After that, the robbers were able to rob the coach without being disturbed. Even our fearless leader, the mayor of London, was attacked in front of his whole entourage by a single highway robber. In the London jails, prisoners fought with their guards, and the guards opened fire on the prisoners. Thieves stole necklaces with diamond crosses off the necks of lords at court. Soldiers entered the St. Giles house looking for stolen goods, and the mob opened fire on them, so they fired back, and no one thought any of these events the least bit unusual. During all of this, the executioner was in constant demand, despite being terrible at his job. He would hang a burglar on a Saturday who had only been arrested that Tuesday. He would brand dozens of peopleís hands at Newgate and then burn controversial pamphlets in front of Westminster Hall. One day he might execute a terrible murderer, and the next day he would execute a poor thief who had stolen a few pennies from a farmerís son.              

 All of these events, and a thousand others like them, happened in and around the year 1775. In this atmosphere, with Death and Fate working quietly, those stern-looking kings and plain and beautiful queens of England and France carried on confidently, ruling by their divine right with a high hand. Through it all, Fate and Death worked without impediment. And so, in 1775, these two royal couples, and many of their citizens whose stories are told in this book, headed toward their destinies.              

 This story starts with a man traveling along the road to Dover on a Friday night in late November. The Dover mail coach was also on the road and was moving slowly up Shooterís Hill. The man walked up the hill in the mud next to the mail coach, as did the rest of the coachís passengers. The passengers werenít walking because they wanted exercise; they were walking because the hill, the harness, the mud, and the weight of the mail made the coach so heavy that the horses pulling it had already stopped three times. The horses had even tried to turn around and drag the coach back to Blackheath, an act equivalent to mutiny. The coachman and the guard, however, refusing to allow such behvior, whipped the horses with the reins and persuaded them to continue on.              

 With their heads bowed down and their tails shaking, the horses stomped their way through the thick mud, struggling and tripping as if they were coming apart at their joints. Whenever the coachman stopped them, yelling ìWo-ho! so-ho-then!î the lead horse would violently shake his head, as if he were trying to tell the driver that the coach would never make it. Each time the lead horse shook like this, one of the nervous passengers would jump, and feel uneasy.             

 A steam-like mist moved gloomily up the hill, like a ghost looking for a place to rest, but finding none. The mist was cold and damp, and it moved slowly through the air in ripples that flowed on top of one another like the waves of a rough sea. It was so thick that all that could be seen by the light of the coach lamps was the mist itself and a few yards of the road. Steam rose off the struggling horses and mixed with the mist, as if the mist were coming from the horses themselves.              

 The two other passengers, beside the one already mentioned, were also plodding their way up the hill beside the mail coach. All three men were bundled up all the way to their ears and wore high boots. They were so covered up that not one of them could say what the others looked like, and all were so secretive that their minds were just as hidden as their faces. In those days, travelers kept to themselves, because anyone on the road could be a robber or in league with robbers. Every inn and alehouse had someone in it working for thieves, from the landlord down to the lowliest stable boyóanyone could be a criminal. This is what the guard of the Dover mail coach thought to himself that Friday night in November 1775, as the mail coach lumbered up Shooterís Hill and the guard stood at his place on the back, stomping his feet and staying close to the chest of weapons. In the chest was a loaded   blunderbuss an early form of shotgun with a short barrel  blunderbuss , six or eight handguns, and a layer of swords at the bottom.              

 The mood in the Dover mail coach was friendly as usual: the guard suspected the passengers, the passengers suspected each other and the guard, everyone was suspicious of everyone else, and the driver trusted no one but the horses, though he would have sworn on the Bible that they were not strong enough to make the trip.             

 ìWo-ho!î shouted the driver to the horses. ìOne more tug and youíll be at the top of the hill, and damn you for all the trouble it took to get you there! Joe!î             

 ìHello!î the guard replied.             

 ìWhat time do you think it is, Joe?î             

 ìTen minutes past eleven.î             

 ìAnd weíre not to the top of Shooterís Hill yet!î yelled the angry driver. ìYah! Get a move on!î              

 The driver struck the lead horse with his whip, and the horse made a strong push up the hill as the other horses followed. The Dover mail coach pushed on once again, with the high boots of the passengers squashing through the mud next to it. When the coach stopped, the passengers stopped and stayed close beside it. If any of them had been brave enough to suggest they walk ahead into the mist and darkness, one of the others would have suspected him of being a highway robber and shot him.              

 The last push moved the mail coach to the top of the hill. The horses stopped to catch their breath. The guard got down to set the brake for the descent down the hill, and to open the coach door to let the passengers in.              

 ìHey, Joe!î yelled the driver in a warning voice, looking down from the top of the coach.              

 ìWhat is it, Tom?î             

 They both listened.              

 ìSounds like a horse trotting toward us, Joe.î             

 ìIíd say that horse is moving faster than that, Tom,î replied the guard. He let go of the door and jumped back to his place on the coach. ìGentlemen, in the name of the king, get back in the coach!î             

 With this hurried command, he cocked the gun, and stood ready to fire.             

 The passenger followed throughout this book was on the coach step getting in. The other two passengers were right behind him, about to follow. He remained on the step, half in the coach and half out. They all looked back and forth between the driver and the guard, listening. The driver and the guard looked back at the passengers, and even the lead horse listened and looked back at them.              

 It became very quiet once the rumbling and struggling of the mail coach had stopped, adding to the stillness of the night. The panting of the horses made the mail coach shake as if it, too, were nervous. The passengersí hearts beat so loudly it was as if they could be heard outside their bodies. But the quietness reflected the emotions of the passengers, who were out of breath, and holding their breath, their heartbeats speeding up in expectation.             

 The sound of a horse running came quickly and furiously up the hill.             

 ìHalt!î yelled the guard as loud as he could. ìYou there! Stop or Iíll shoot!î             

 The horse suddenly slowed with a lot of splashing and stumbling. A manís voice called from the mist, ìIs that the Dover mail coach?î             

 ìNever mind what it is!î answered the guard. ìWho are you?î             

 ìIs that the Dover mail coach?î             

 ìWhy do you want to know?î             

 ìIf it is, Iím looking for one of the passengers.î             

 ìWhich passenger?î             

 ìMr. Jarvis Lorry.î             

 Our character said that he was Mr. Jarvis Lorry. The guard, the driver, and the two other passengers looked at him distrustfully.             

 ìStay where you are,î the guard yelled to the man in the mist. ìI donít want to make a mistake and shoot you. The man named Lorry, speak up!î             

 ìWhatís the matter?î asked the passenger, in a slightly trembling voice. ìWhoís looking for me? Is it Jerry?î             

 ìIf that is Jerry, I donít like the sound of his voice,î the guard muttered to himself. ìItís scratchier than Iíd care for.î             

 ìYes, Mr. Lorry.î             

 ìWhatís the matter?î             

 ìI have a letter for you from T. and Company.î             

 ìI know this messenger, guard,î said Mr. Lorry, exiting the coach onto the road. The other two passengers helped him from behind, though not very politely, then immediately climbed into the coach, shut the door, and closed the window. ìHe can come close. Thereís nothing to worry about.î             

 ìI hope not, but I canít be sure of that,î grumbled the guard to himself. ìHey, you!î he said to Jerry.             

 ìHey to you!î said Jerry, raspier than before.             

 ìCome over slowly, do you hear me? And if youíve got gun holsters on your saddle, donít let me see your hands go near them. Iím quick to make a mistake, and my mistakes usually involve bullets. Let me see you.î             

 The figures of a horse and rider came slowly out of the swirling mist and over to the side of the mail coach, where the passenger was standing. The rider bent down, and keeping an eye on the guard, handed the passenger a small folded piece of paper. The riderís horse was exhausted, and both the horse and rider were covered in mud, from the hoofs of the horse to the riderís hat.             

 ìGuard!î said the passenger in a confidential tone.              

 The guard stood ready, his right hand on the handle of the blunderbuss and his left on the barrel. His eyes were on the horseman, and he answered curtly, ìSir.î              

 ìThereís nothing to worry about. I work at Tellsonís Bank. You must know Tellsonís Bank in London. Iím going to Paris on business. Iíll give you money to buy yourself a drink. Will you let me read this?î             

 ìIf you do it quickly, sir.î             

 He opened it in the light of the coach lamp, and read it to himself first and then aloud: ìëWait at Dover for Mademoiselle.í Itís a short message, you see, guard. Jerry, tell them my answer was ëBrought back to life.íî             

 Jerry jumped in his saddle. ìThatís a very strange answer,î he said, raspier than ever.             

 ìGive them that reply and they will know that I understood their message as if Iíd written it myself. Have a good trip back. Good night.î             

 With that, Mr. Lorry opened the coach door and got in. He wasnít helped by the other passengers, who had quietly hidden their watches and purses in their boots and were pretending to be asleep. They wanted only to avoid trouble.             

 The mail coach pushed on again, with a heavier mist closing round it as it began to move down the hill. The guard soon put his blunderbuss back inside the chest and checked on the rest of the weapons. Having done that, he checked on the extra pistols he wore on his belt, and then checked on the smaller chest under his seat, in which he kept some blacksmithing tools, a couple of torches, and a box of kindling for starting fires. The guard was so well prepared that if the coach lamps went out, which happened sometimes, he could easily light them again from inside the coach within five minutes (if he were lucky).             

 ìTom!î said Joe quietly over the top of the coach.             

 ìYeah, Joe.î             

 ìDid you hear that message?î             

 ìI did, Joe.î             

 ìWhat do you think it meant, Tom?î             

 ìNothing, Joe.î             

 ìThatís a coincidence,î Joe said, ìI thought the same thing myself.î             

 Jerry, left alone in the dark mist, got down to give his tired horse a rest, wipe the mud off his face, and shake the water from his wide hat brim, which could probably hold half a gallon. He waited there with his bridle on his wet, muddy arm until he could no longer hear the wheels of the mail coach and the night was still again. Then he turned to walk down the hill.             

 ìAfter galloping all the way from Temple Bar, old lady, I wonít ride you again until we get to level ground,î said the raspy-voiced messenger, looking at his horse. ìëBrought back to life.í Thatís a very strange message. You wouldnít like that, Jerry. Youíd be in trouble if dead people started coming back to life!î             

 Itís amazing to think that every human being is a complete mystery to every other human being. When I enter a big city at night, I think how every one of the houses clustered together in the dark holds its own secret inside; and every room in every house has its own secret; and every one of the thousands of people in the city keeps a secret from those closest to him. In a way itís like death. When I am dead I can no longer turn the pages of lifeís book, and vainly hope to read all of it. I wonít be able to look at the mysteries of life, and catch glimpses of hidden truths. Life ends in an instant, when Iíve only begun to experience it. It ends with its mysteries forever unsolved, leaving me without answers. The same is true of my friend, neighbor, or dearest love, all of whom will die. Death turns the secrets each individual carries into permanent mysteries, just as my secrets will never come out once Iíve died. Are the dead in Londonís graveyards more mysterious to me than its living inhabitants are, or am I as much of a mystery to those inhabitants myself?             

 In a way, our secrets make us all equals. Jerry, the messenger, possessed as many secrets as the king, or the first minister of state, or the richest businessman in London. The same is true of the three passengers closed up in the lumbering old mail coach. They were all mysteries to each other, as unknown to each other as if they had each been in different coaches, traveling in completely different places.              

 The messenger rode slowly back, stopping often at alehouses along the way to drink, but keeping to himself, with his hat angled over his eyes. His eyes, which fit him well, were solid black and much too close together, as if each eye feared being caught at something if it were too far from the other. They peered out menacingly from under his old hat, which was pulled down low and looked like a   three-sided spittoon a receptacle for tobacco chewers to spit into  three-sided spittoon . And they looked out over the large scarf that covered his chin and throat and went down nearly to his knees. When he stopped for a drink, he would remove the scarf with his left hand while he drank with his right, and as soon as he was done, he would cover his face again.              

 ìNo, Jerry, no!î the messenger repeated to himself as he traveled. ìThat wouldnít do, Jerry. Youíre an honest worker. It wouldnít suit your type of business! Brought backó! He must have been drunk!î             

 He was so confused by the message that he kept taking off his hat to scratch his head. Except on the very top of his head, which was bald, he had stiff, black hair that stuck up in spikes all over his head and grew almost down to his large, wide nose. His hair looked so much like metal spikes that the worldís best leapfrog players might have refused to jump over him, thinking it too dangerous.              

 He rode back with the message, which he was to deliver to the night watchman at the door of Tellsonís Bank, next to Temple Bar. The watchman was to deliver it to important people inside. While the messenger rode, the shadows of the night seemed to take the form of the dead returning to life, like the message had said. His horse also saw shapes in the darkness arising out of her private fears. Those fears must have been numerous, for she jumped at every shadow on the road.             

 The mail coach lumbered, jolted, rattled, and bumped along slowly, with its three passengers inside. They must have also seen shapes in the forms as they dozed off and let their thoughts wander.             

 A great number of customers withdrew their money from Tellsonís Bank through the mail carried by the mail coach. As Mr. Lorry nodded off, with his arm through a leather strap to keep him from banging against the passenger beside him and pushing him into the corner, he dreamed the mail coach was the bank itself on a busy day. The sound of the rattling harness became the jingle of coins, and more checks were cashed in five minutes than Tellsonís, with its many local and foreign clients, had cashed in three times that period. He dreamt that the bank vaults under Tellsonís, with all of their valuables and secrets (and he knew plenty about them), opened up in front of him. He walked through them with his large keys and a dim candle and found everything safe and sound, just as he had left it.              

 Although he thought constantly of the bank, and although he remained vaguely aware that he was still in the coach (the way you are only vaguely aware of pain when on a pain-killer), another thought ran through his mind all night. He had the feeling that he was on his way to dig someone out of a grave.             

 Now, although several faces appeared in front of him in the night, he couldnít determine which was the face of the buried person. All the faces belonged to a forty-five-year-old man, but they all differed in the expression they wore, and in how worn-out they looked. One facial expression followed another: pride, contempt, defiance, stubbornness, submission, and lamentation. Some had sunken cheeks, sickly pale skin, hands and bodies that had wasted away. But it was almost always the same face, and every head of hair had gone prematurely white. In his dream, Mr. Lorry asked the ghostly figure a hundred times:             

 ìHow long had you been buried?î             

 The answer was always the same: ìAlmost eighteen years.î             

 ìHad you given up hope of being dug up?î             

 ìYes, a long time ago.î             

 ìDo you know that youíve been brought back to life?î             

 ìThatís what they tell me.î             

 ìYou want to live, donít you?î             

 ìI donít know.î             

 ìShould I show her to you? Will you come see her?î             

 The ghostly figured answered this question in different and contradictory ways. Sometimes he answered weakly: ìWait! I would die if I saw her too soon.î Sometimes he cried tenderly and said, ìTake me to her.î Sometimes he became confused and answered, ìI donít know her. I donít understand.î             

 After these imaginary conversations, Mr. Lorry would dream that he was digging the man outósometimes with a spade, sometimes a shovel, and sometimes his hands. Once the man was dug out, with dirt clinging to his face and hair, he would suddenly turn to dust. This would startle Mr. Lorry and wake him. He would open the window to allow the feeling of mist and rain on his face to bring him back to reality.              

 But even when Mr. Lorry was fully awake, looking at the mist and rain, the light from the lamps, the hedge passing by at the roadside, the shadows outside the coach would blend together with the shadows within. The real bank at Temple Bar, the real business of the day before, the real bank vaults, the real message he had received, and the real message he sent back would still be there. But the ghostly face would rise up and appear to him again.             

 ìHow long have you been buried?î             

 ìAlmost eighteen years.î             

 ìYou want to live, donít you?î             

 ìI donít know.î             

 In his dream, Mr. Lorry would continue to dig until one of the other two passengers would wake him and tell him to close the window. Then he would put his arm securely through the leather strap and think about the two sleeping passengers, until he fell back asleep and began once again to dream about the bank and the grave.              

 ìHow long had you been buried?î             

 ìAlmost eighteen years.î             

 ìHad you given up all hope of being dug out?î             

 ìYes, a long time ago.î             

 Mr. Lorry could still hear those words, as clearly as if they had just been spoken in real life, when he woke to realize it was daylight, and the shadows of the night were all gone.              

 He opened the window and looked out at the rising sun. He saw a field, with a plow sitting where it had been left the night before when the horses were untied from it. Further in the distance, he saw a quiet forest, where the bright red and golden yellow leaves remained on the trees. Though the ground was cold and wet, the sky was clear and the sun rose, bright, calm, and beautiful.             

 ìEighteen years!î said the passenger, looking at the sun. ìGood God! Imagine being buried alive for eighteen years!î             

 When the coach reached Dover late in the morning, the head attendant at the Royal George Hotel opened the coach door. He did it with a grand gesture, because a trip from London to Dover during the winter was difficult, and making the journey was an achievement worth congratulating.             

 By that time, there was only one passenger to congratulate. The other two had gotten out at their destinations. The mildewy interior of the coach, with its damp and dirty straw, its unpleasant smell, and its darkness, was like the inside of a large dog cage. Mr. Lorry, shaking off the straw and dressed in his shaggy coat, floppy hat, and with his legs covered in mud, looked like a large dog himself.              

 ìWill there be a mail boat to Calais tomorrow, attendant?î             

 ìYes, sir, if we still have good weather and the wind is decent. The tide will be good for setting out at about two in the afternoon, sir. Would you like a bed, sir?î             

 ìI wonít go to bed until tonight, but I would like a bedroom and a barber.î             

 ìAnd then breakfast, sir? Yes, sir. This way, sir, please. Staff! Show him to the Concord room! Bring the gentlemanís suitcase and some hot water. Pull off the gentlemanís boots. (You will find a nice coal fire there, sir.) Bring the barber! Get going!î              

 The Concord room was always given to passengers from the mail coach, and these passengers were always heavily bundled up when they entered. For this reason, the room was a bit of a curiosity: everyone who went in looked the same, but when they came out they all looked different. This is why a steward, two porters, several maids, and the landlady all happened to be standing around between the Concord room and the coffee room, when a sixty-year-old gentleman, dressed up in a worn but tidy brown suit with large cuffs and flaps on his pockets, passed by on his way to breakfast.             

 The gentleman in the brown suit was the only person in the coffee room that morning. His table was near the fire, and he sat so still as he waited for his food that, with the firelight on him, he looked as though he was having his portrait painted.             

 He looked very neat, with a hand resting on each knee, and his watch ticking loudly and seriously under his flapped waistcoat, contrasting with the playful flickering of the fire. He was proud of his legs and wore thin, tight brown stockings to show them off. His shoes and shoe buckles, though plain, were well-kept. He wore a strange shiny blond wig that sat tightly on his head. The wig looked like it was made from strands of silk or glass rather than from hair. His clothes, though not as nice as his stockings, were as white as the tops of the waves that broke on the beach nearby, or the sails of boats glinting in the sun far out at sea. His face was calm and reserved, but his moist, bright eyes twinkled from under his wig. It must have been hard for him to train his bright eyes to take on the dull expression of the employees of Tellsonís Bank. His cheeks were a healthy color, and though his face had some wrinkles, it showed few signs of anxiety. Perhaps the clerks at Tellsonís Bank were mainly concerned with other peopleís problems, and maybe other peopleís problems, like secondhand clothes, are easy to put on and take off.              

 Completing his resemblance to a man having his portrait painted, Mr. Lorry fell asleep. The arrival of his breakfast woke him, and he said to the attendant, as he moved his chair up to the table:              

 ìI would like you to get a room ready for a young woman who may arrive here at any time today. She may ask for Mr. Jarvis Lorry, or she may just ask for a gentleman from Tellsonís Bank. Please let me know when she arrives.î             

 ìYes, sir. Tellsonís Bank in London, sir?î             

 ìYes.î             

 ìYes, sir. We often have the honor of hosting you gentlemen as you travel between London and Paris, sir. Tellson and Company employees travel a great deal, sir.î             

 ìYes. We are very much a French business, as well as an English one.î             

 ìYes, sir. You donít frequently do the traveling yourself, do you sir?î             

 ìNot in recent years. Itís been fifteen years since weósince Iólast came back from France.î             

 ìReally, sir? That was before I worked here, sir. Before the new owners bought this place, sir. The George Hotel was owned by other people back then, sir.î             

 ìI believe it was.î             

 ìBut I would bet, sir, that a bank like Tellson and Company was thriving fifty, not to mention fifteen, years ago?î             

 ìYou could triple that and say a hundred and fifty.î             

 ìReally, sir!î             

 The waiter opened wide his mouth and eyes as he stepped back from the table. He moved his napkin from his right arm to his left, shifted into a casual stance, and stood watching while Mr. Lorry ate and drank. The waiter watched as though looking from a watchtower, as waiters have always done.             

 When Mr. Lorry had finished breakfast, he went out for a stroll on the beach. The cramped, crooked town of Dover couldnít be seen from the beach, as though it were hiding, and it extended all the way to the chalk cliffs. The sea tossed stones wildly about on the beach. It did what it liked, and what it liked was destruction. It threatened the town by crashing angrily against the cliffs. The air around the houses had such a fishy smell that one might have thought sick fish went to the water to dip themselves in it, just as sick people sometimes do. Not much fishing was done in the port, but   suspicious-looking people were always wandering along the water at night Dover was known as a smuggling port  suspicious-looking people were always wandering along the water at night , particularly at high tide. Small businessmen who didnít work at all sometimes mysteriously came upon large fortunes for no apparent reason, and for some strange reason, nobody could tolerate the lamps being lit at night.             

 As afternoon came on, the air, which at times was clear enough that one could see the French coast, clouded over with mist and fog. Mr. Lorryís mood seemed to cloud over as well. When it got dark, he sat in front of the coffee-room fire, awaiting his dinner just as he had awaited his breakfast. He imagined he was digging again as he stared into the red coals of the fire.             

 Mr. Lorry drank a bottle of good red wine after dinner, causing him to lose interest in work. He had been sitting there for a long time and had just poured out his last glassful of wineówith as happy an expression as any elderly gentleman can have after drinking most of a bottleówhen he heard the rattling of wheels coming up the street and pulling into the innís yard.             

 He put down his glass without drinking. ìMademoiselle is here!î he said.             

 In just a few minutes the waiter came in to tell him that Miss Manette had arrived from London and would be happy to see him.             

 ìSo soon?î             

 Miss Manette had had some food and drink on the journey and didnít need anymore when she arrived. She was extremely anxious to see Mr. Lorry immediately, if he was ready to meet with her.             

 Mr. Lorry tossed back the rest of his wine with an air of calm desperation, straightened his odd little wig over his ears, and followed the waiter to Miss Manetteís room. The room was large and dark, and it was furnished like a funeral parlor with black horsehair furniture and heavy, dark tables. These tables had been oiled repeatedly, so that the two tall candles on the table in the middle of the room were gloomily reflected in the oiled surface. The reflections made it look like the candles themselves were buried deep in graves of black mahogany, and they would give off no light until they were dug out.             

 The room was so dark that, as Mr. Lorry carefully crossed the worn Turkish carpet, he thought for a moment that Miss Manette was in a different room. Then he moved past the two tall candles and saw a young lady standing to meet him between the table and the fire. She was no older than seventeen and wore a riding cloak. She was still holding her straw traveling hat by its ribbon. He looked at her short, thin, pretty figure, her golden blonde hair, her curious blue eyes, and her young, smooth forehead, which had a habit of wrinkling up in an expression that looked like a mixture of confusion, wonder, fear, and keen awareness. As he looked at her, she suddenly reminded him of a child he had held in his arms on a journey across the Channel separating England and France, on a cold day when it was hailing heavily and the sea was high. The similarity passed quickly, like steam breathed on the mirror behind her would pass quickly. On the frame of that mirror behind her, figurines of black cupids, broken and headless, held out baskets of fruit to black goddesses. Mr. Lorry bowed formally to Miss Manette.             

 ìPlease, sit down, sir,î she said, in a very clear and pleasant young voice with a very slight foreign accent.             

 ìI kiss your hand, miss,î said Mr. Lorry, in a slightly old-fashioned manner, as he bowed formally again and sat down.             

 ìI received a letter from the bank, sir, yesterday, telling me about some informationóor discoveryóî             

 ìThe word isnít important, miss, either one will do.î             

 ìóregarding what little property my poor father owned. I never met him. He has been dead so longÖî             

 Mr. Lorry moved in his seat and looked uneasily at the line of black cupids, as if they could help anyone!             

 ìÖmaking it necessary that I travel to Paris to meet with a gentleman from the bank, who would be sent there to meet with me.î              

 ìThatís me.î             

 ìThatís what I thought, sir.î             

 She curtseyed to him (young ladies curtsied in those days) to acknowledge how much older and wiser he was than her. He bowed to her again.             

 ìI replied to the bank, sir. I told them that since I am an orphan with no friends who could go with me, I would be grateful if the gentleman from the bank could travel with me for protection. The gentleman had already left London, but I believe a messenger was sent after him to ask him to wait for me here.î             

 ìI was happy to be given the job,î said Mr. Lorry. ìI will be even happier to perform it.î             

 ìThank you, sir. I am very grateful. The bank told me that you would explain the details of the situation to me, and that I should prepare myself to be surprised by what I hear. I have prepared myself as best I can. Naturally, I am anxious to know what this is all about.î             

 ìOf course,î said Mr. Lorry. ìYesóIóî             

 After a pause, he adjusted his blond wig around his ears and added, ìIt is very difficult to begin.î             

 He did not begin, and unable to decide how to proceed, looked her in the eye. Her forehead wrinkled into that unique, though attractive, expression. She raised her hand impulsively, as if trying to catch a passing shadow.             

 ìHave we ever met before, sir?î             

 ìWould we have?î Mr. Lorry opened his hands and extended them toward her with an awkward smile.             

 Between her eyebrows and just above her dainty little nose, which was as fine and delicate as possible, her expression deepened. She sat down thoughtfully in the chair next to which she had been standing. He watched her as she thought, and as soon as she looked up again, he continued:             

 ìIn England, where you now live, I suppose I should speak to you the way I would speak to any young English lady. Yes, Miss Manette?î             

 ìIf you please, sir.î             

 ìMiss Manette, I am a businessman. I have a job to do. As you listen to me, donít pay any more attention to me than as if I were just a robotóreally, I am not much more than that. With your permission, miss, I will tell you a story about one of my bankís customers.î             

 ìStory?î             

 He seemed to purposefully mistake the word she had repeated when he added quickly, ìYes, customers. In the bank business we usually call our clients customers. The customer I will tell you about was a French gentleman, a talented man of scienceóa doctor.î             

 ìNot from Beauvais?î             

 ìWhy, yes, from Beauvais. Like your father, Monsieur Manette, this gentleman was from Beauvais. And, like your father, this gentleman was well-known in Paris. I had the honor of knowing him there. Our dealings were about business, but private. At that time I had been working at our branch in France for, oh, twenty years.î             

 ìMay I ask, what time this was, sir?î             

 ìIím talking about twenty years ago, miss. He married an English lady and I was one of the trustees of their affairs. His affairs, like the affairs of many French gentlemen and their families, were entirely in the hands of Tellsonís. In a similar way, I am, or have been, a trustee of sorts for many of our customers. These relationships are entirely business, miss. They are not friendships. I have moved from one to the next over the course of my work, just as I pass from one customer to the next during my work day. In other words, I have no feelings toward these people. I am only a machine. To continueóî              

 ìThis sounds like my fatherís story, sirîóshe looked at him intenselyóìand Iím starting to think that when my mother died only two years after my father did, and I became an orphan, you were the one that brought me to England. I am almost sure it was you.î             

 Mr. Lorry took her hesitating little hand that reached forward to take his, and raised it to his lips. He then brought the young woman immediately to her chair again. Holding the back of the chair with his left hand, and using his right to rub his chin, adjust his wig, and emphasize what he said, he stood looking down into her face as she sat looking up at his.              

 ìMiss Manette, it was me. And you will see how I was telling the truth when I said I have no personal feelings, and the relationships I have are all professional. This is why I havenít seen you since then. No, you have been a ward of Tellsonís Bank since then, and I have been busy with the bankís other business. I have no time for feelings. I spend all of my time working for the great financial machine.î              

 After this strange description of his work life, Mr. Lorry flattened his blond wig on his head with both hands (which was really unnecessary, since it was already as flat as could be) and continued.             

 ìSo far, miss, as you have said, this is the story you have heard about your poor father. This next part is different, though. If your father had not died when he didóDonít be afraid! What a reaction!î             

 She had jumped and had grabbed his wrist with both her hands.             

 ìPlease,î said Mr. Lorry soothingly. He took his left hand off the back of the chair and placed it on her fingers, which clasped on him in a violent tremble: ìPlease control yourself. Itís a business matter. As I was sayingóî             

 She looked so upset that he lost track of what he was saying, and started over:             

 ìAs I was saying, what if Monsieur Manette had not died? What if he had suddenly and silently disappeared? What if he had been taken away? It would be easy to guess what kind of place he was taken to, but what if no one could find him? What if he had had an enemy in France who had such power that even the bravest people were afraid to whisper about him? The power, for instance, to send anyone to prison for any length of time. What if his wife had begged the king, the queen, the members of the court, and the church for any news about him, but with no success? If this were true, then your fatherís story would be the same as that of the poor doctor from Beauvais.î              

 ìI beg you to tell me more, sir.î             

 ìI will. I am going to. Can you handle it?î             

 ìI can handle anything but the uncertainty youíre causing me right now.î             

 ìYou speak calmly, and you are calm. Thatís good!î said Mr. Lorry, though his words were more convincing than his behavior. ìThink of it as a business matter, a job that must be done. Now if this doctorís wife, although she was a brave woman, had suffered so much before her little child was bornóî             

 ìThe little child was a daughter, sir.î             

 ìYes, a daughter. Remember, this is a business matteródonít be upset. Perhaps, the poor woman had suffered so much before her little child was born that she decided to spare the poor child the same pain by raising her to believe that her father was dead.î Miss Manette kneeled down in front of him. ìNo, donít kneel down! In the name of Heaven, why should you kneel down to me!î             

 ìFor telling me the truth. Oh good, kind sir, for telling me the truth!î             

 ìAóitís a business matter. Youíre confusing me, and how can I do my job if Iím confused? Letís be clear-headed. Please tell me now, for instance, how much nine times nine pence is, or how many shillings are in twenty guineas. That would make me feel better about your state of mind.î              

 She didnít answer him. But she remained so still after he sat her up in her chair, and her hands, as they held his wrists, were so much steadier than before, that she communicated calmness to Mr. Jarvis Lorry.              

 ìThatís right, thatís right. Be brave! This is business! You have business in front of you, important business. Miss Manette, this is how your mother decided to handle things. She never gave up her search for your father, though she was unsuccessful. When she diedóI believe broken-heartedóshe left you at two years old to grow up beautiful and happy. She didnít want you wondering whether your father died soon after going to prison, or if he wasted away over the course of many years.î             

 As he spoke, he looked down with admiration and pity on her flowing golden hair, and he imagined that it might already be streaked with gray.             

 ìYou know that your parents didnít have much, and what they did have was given to you and your mother. No new money or any other property has been discovered, butóî             

 He felt her grab his wrist tighter and stopped speaking. The expression on her forehead, which had so much attracted his attention, had deepened into one of pain and horror.             

 ìBut he has beenóbeen found. He is alive. He has probably changed a lot. He might be a broken man, though we will hope for the best. Still, heís alive. Your father has been taken to the house of one of his former servants in Paris, and we are going there. I go to identify him, if I can. You go to bring him back to life. To take bring him love, duty, rest, and comfort.î             

 A shiver ran through her body and his. She said, in a low, clear, awe-struck voice, as if she were in a dream:             

 ìI am going to see his ghost! It will be his ghost, not him!î             

 Mr. Lorry quietly rubbed her hands, which held his arm. ìThere now, there now! You know the best and the worst of it now. You are well on your way to seeing the poor mistreated gentleman. If the journey goes well, you will soon be with him.î              

 She repeated in the same tone, as low as a whisper, ìI have been free, I have been happy, but his ghost has never haunted me!î             

 ìOne more thing,î said Mr. Lorry, emphasizing the words to get her attention. ìHe was discovered under another name, his own name being either long forgotten or hidden. It wouldnít do any good to ask which was the case, or to ask if heíd been held prisoner so long by mistake or on purpose. Itís best not to ask around about it because it would be dangerous. Better not to mention it, and to get him out of France, at least for a while. Even I, who am safe because I am an Englishman, and even Tellsonís Bank, as important as it is to the credit of the French government, need to stay out of the matter. I carry nothing in writing that directly refers to this matter. This is an entirely secret operation. All information pertaining to the matter is contained in the one line ëBrought back to life,í which could mean anything. But whatís the matter? She doesnít hear a word! Miss Manette!î             

 She sat completely still and silent in her chair, completely shocked. Her eyes were open and focused on him, and she still had that expression on her forehead, as if it had been carved or branded there. She was holding onto his arm so tightly that he was afraid that if he took it away he would hurt her. He stayed still and yelled out for help.             

 A wild-looking woman came running into the room ahead of some of the hotel staff. Even in his agitation, Mr. Lorry noticed she was all in red, with red hair, and wore a bizarre, tight-fitting outfit and a bonnet that looked like a soldierís hat, or a large wooden spoon, or a block of cheese. The woman detached him from Miss Manetteís grip by laying a brawny hand on Mr. Lorryís chest and throwing him against the nearest wall.             

 (ìI think sheís actually a man!î Mr. Lorry thought as he hit the wall.)             

 ìWhy, look at you all!î the woman yelled at the inn servants. ìWhy donít you go get some things to help her instead of standing there staring at me? I am not that pretty, am I? Why donít you go get some things to help her. Iíll teach you a lesson if you donít bring me smelling salts, cold water, and vinegar quickly!î             

 The servants immediately ran off, and the woman softly laid Miss Manette on a sofa. She attended to her with great skill and gentleness, calling her ìmy precious!î and ìmy bird!î and spreading her blonde hair out over her shoulders with great pride and care.             

 ìAnd you in the brown!î she said, turning angrily to Mr. Lorry. ìCouldnít you say what you needed to say without frightening her to death? Look at her, with her pretty pale face and her cold hands. Do you call that being a banker?!î             

 Mr. Lorry was so unsettled by the tricky question that he could only look on from a distance with pathetic sympathy and humility. Meanwhile, the strong woman, having sent away the servants with the vague threat that she would ìteach them a lesson,î which she didnít specify, slowly brought Miss Manette back to consciousness and placed the young ladyís drooping head on her shoulder.             

 ìI hope sheíll feel better now,î said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìNo thanks to you in the bown, if she does,î the woman responded. ìMy pretty darling!î             

 ìI hope you will accompany Miss Manette to France,î said Mr. Lorry after another pause of pathetic sympathy and humility.              

 ìNot very likely!î replied the strong woman. ìIf I was supposed to travel overseas, do you suppose Fate would have put me on an island?î             

 This was another tricky question, and Mr. Jarvis Lorry went away to think about it.              

 A large wine cask had been dropped and lay broken in the street. The accident happened while people were taking it out of a cart. The cask had rolled out quickly, its hoops burst, and it now lay on the stones just outside the door of the wine-shop, shattered like a walnut-shell.             

 Everyone nearby had stopped what they were doing and ran to drink the spilled wine. The streetís cobblestones were oddly shaped and stuck out in all directions, as if they were made just to injure those who walked on them. The stones divided the spilled wine into little puddles, and a crowd proportional to each puddleís size surrounded each one. Some men kneeled down and made scoops with their hands, and sipped. Or they tried to give sips to the women bending over them before the wine ran out between their fingers. Other men and women dipped old clay mugs into the puddles, or even soaked the wine up with womenís headscarves then squeezed it into their babiesí mouths. Others piled up mounds of mud to stop the flow of wine. Others, directed by people watching from the windows above, ran around trying to stop the little streams. Others concentrated on the red pieces of the cask, licking or chewing the wine-soaked wood eagerly. There was no drainage system to carry away the wine, and not only did the people drink all the wine, but so much mud was cleared away with it that people might have thought a street cleaner had come by, if any of them believed a street cleaner would actually come to such a poor neighborhood.             

 The sounds of laughter and amused voices, coming from men, women, and children, sounded in the street while the people drank up the wine. There was a little roughness to the event, and a lot of playfulness. There was a special camaraderie in it, an urge in everyone to join in with someone else. This led, especially among the light-hearted ones, to playful hugs, toasts, and handshakes, and even to as many as a dozen people joining hands and dancing. When the wine was gone, and one could see the patterns in the mud where people had scratched it to get wine, the festivities abruptly ended. The man who had left his saw stuck in the firewood he was cutting went back to work. The women returned to their door-steps where they had left little pots of hot ashes, in which they tried to ease the pain in their own hungry fingers and toes or in those of their children. Sleeveless men with dirty, matted hair and thin faces who had crept out of cellars into the daylight went back inside. The mood on the street returned to its natural gloom.              

 The red wine had stained the ground where it spilled on the narrow street, in the Paris suburb of Saint Antoine. It had stained many hands, faces, bare feet, and wooden shoes, too. The hands of the man who sawed wood left red marks on the logs. The forehead of the woman who nursed her baby was stained from the old rag she wrapped around her head again. Those who had greedily chewed on pieces of the cask now had a tiger-like smear across their mouths. One tall prankster wearing a long, filthy nightcap dipped his finger in the mixture of mud and wine and wrote the word blood on a wall.              

 The time would come when blood, too, would be spilled on the streets, and many of the people would be stained with it.             

 The gloomy mood that had disappeared briefly from Saint Antoine now returned. Cold, dirt, sickness, lack of education, and poverty caused the darkness of that mood. All were serious problems, especially poverty. A few people, who had been worn down as if in a mill, and not a magical mill that makes old people young, shivered at every corner. They passed in and out at every doorway, looked from every window, fluttered in their ragged clothing, which the wind shook. The mill had ground them down, making the young people seem old. The children had very old faces and harsh voices, and hunger was on every face, young and old. It was everywhere. The wrinkles of their aged faces and every breath they took suggested hunger. The tall houses and the tattered clothes that hung on the poles and clotheslines suggested hunger. The clothes sewn together from straw and rags and wood and paper suggested hunger. The small bits of firewood the man was sawing, and the chimneys that had no smoke coming out of them suggested hunger. The filthy streets covered in trash but not a bit of food suggested hunger. The bakerís shelves and every tiny loaf of his small supply of bad bread suggested hunger. The sausage shop, where they sold sausages made from dead dogs, suggested hunger. The rattling of chestnuts in a roaster, and the bits of potatoes, fried with just a few drops of oil, suggested hunger.             

 The neighborhood was wellsuited to hunger. It had a filthy, narrow, winding street with other narrow and winding streets branching off it, all filled with poor people in smelly rags and nightcaps. Everything had a sinister, sickly look to it. In the desperation of the people there was the animal instinct to revolt. As sad and downtrodden as they were, they had fiery looks in their eyes. Many of them had tight lips that had turned white from the strain of keeping silent. Many people had frowns on their foreheads in the shape of a hangmanís ropeóa rope they imagined themselves hanging from, or pictured using to hang someone else. Poverty was on display in each of the many shop signs. The butcher and pork sellerís signs had only the leanest scraps of meat on them. The bakerís sign had only rough, small loaves of bread. The people crudely displayed in the wine shop signs were scowling suspiciously over their small servings of weak wine and beer. No one was shown as prosperous except for the sellers of tools and weapons. The knife sellerís knives and axes were portrayed as sharp and bright. The smithís hammers looked strong and heavy. The gun makerís guns looked deadly. The cobblestone streets, with their many little pools of mud and water, had no walkways. The gutter flowed down the middle of the streetówhen it flowed at all. That was only during heavy rains, and then it overflowed and ran into the houses. On either side of the street, at wide intervals, a single lamp was hung by a rope and pulley. At night, after the lamplighter had lowered them, lit them, and then raised them up again, a sad group of dimly lit candles hung weakly overhead as if they were on a boat at sea. In a way they were at sea, and all of the people were in imminent danger.              

 For the time would come when the gaunt, jobless, and hungry citizens who watched the lamplighter for so long would think up a better way to do his job. They would hang men by those ropes and pulleys, instead of lamps, revealing their inner darkness. But that time had not yet come. Instead, everyone ignored the warning signs that revolution might be on its way.             

 The wine shop was on a corner. It was nicer than most other shops, and the owner stood outside wearing a yellow jacket and green pants, watching people fight for the spilled wine. ìItís not my problem,î he said, shrugging his shoulders. ìItís the market peopleís fault. Let them bring me another cask.î          

 Then he saw the tall prankster writing on the wall. He yelled to the man across the street.             

 ìHey, Gaspard! What are you doing over there?î             

 The man pointed proudly to the word he had written, as pranksters often do. The joke failed, as prankstersí jokes often do as well.              

 ìWhat are you doing? Are you crazy?î said the owner of the wine shop, crossing the road and covering the word with a handful of mud. ìWhy are you writing this in public? Tell me, is there no other place you can write such words?î             

 While he was talking, he placed his clean hand (possibly by accident, possibly not) over the pranksterís heart. The prankster tapped it with his own hand, jumped up quickly, and landed in a strange dancing pose, holding one of his stained shoe in his hand threateningly. The prankster was a resourceful man.          

 ìPut your shoe back on,î said the wine shop owner. ìGo get some wine and leave that alone.î He wiped his dirty hand on the pranksterís dirty clothes, since the prankster was the reason he had gotten his hand dirty in the first place. Then he went back to the wine shop.              

 The wine shop owner was a stocky, military-looking thirty-year-old man. He must have had a hot temper, since he wore no coat even though it was bitterly cold, though he carried a coat slung over his shoulder. His sleeves were rolled up and his tan arms were bare to his elbows. He wore no hat either, just his short, curly, dark hair. He had a dark complexion, and his good eyes were spaced far apart. He was a pleasant-looking man overall, but stubborn-looking, too. He was a decisive man of strong principles. You wouldnít want to see him charging toward you on a narrow bridge, because nothing would stop him.              

 Madame Defarge, his wife, was sitting behind the shop counter when he came in. She was a large woman about the same age as he was, with alert eyes that rarely seemed to look directly at anything. She had large hands with many rings on them, a calm face, strong features, and had great self-control. There was something about her that made you think that she rarely made mistakes. Madame Defarge, being sensitive to the cold, was wrapped up in fur. She had a large, brightly colored shawl wrapped around her head, though it didnít hide her large earrings. Her knitting was in front of her, where she had laid it down to pick her teeth with a toothpick. She sat picking her teeth with her right elbow supported by her left hand, and didnít say anything when her husband came in. She cleared her throat and raised her eyebrows slightly, indicating to her husband that he should look around the shop for any new customers that had arrived while he was across the street.              

 He looked around and saw an old gentleman and a young woman sitting in the corner. Other people were in the shop too: two were playing cards, two were playing dominoes, and three were standing by the counter trying to make the most of a small amount of wine. As he stepped behind the counter, he noticed the old gentleman give a look to the young woman as if to say, ìThis is the man weíre looking for.î             

 ìWhat the devil are you doing here?î Monsieur Defarge thought. ìI donít know you.î             

 He pretended not to notice the two strangers and went to talk with the three customers drinking at the counter.             

 ìHowís it going, Jacques?î said one of the three to Monsieur Defarge. ìHas all the spilled wine been drunk?î             

 ìEvery drop, Jacques,î answered Monsieur Defarge.              

 After this greeting by first names, Madame Defarge, while picking her teeth with her toothpick, cleared her throat again and raised her eyebrows a bit higher.              

 ìIt is not often,î the second man said to Monsieur Defarge, ìthat these pathetic creatures get to taste wine, or anything besides black bread and death. Donít you agree, Jacques?î             

 ìThatís true, Jacques,î Monsieur Defarge returned.              

 After this second exchange of first names, Madame Defarge, still calmly picking her teeth, cleared her throat again and raised her eyebrows a bit higher.              

 The third man now set down his empty cup, smacked his lips, and said:              

 ìAh! Thatís even worse! These poor animals always have a sour taste in their mouths, and their lives are hard, Jacques. Am I right, Jacques?î              

 ìYou are right, Jacques,î answered Monsieur Defarge.             

 They completed this third exchange of first names just as Madame Defarge put down her toothpick and shifted slightly in her seat, with her eyebrows still up.             

 ìHold up. Wait,î muttered Monsieur Defarge. ìGentlemen, this is my wife!î             

 The three customers took off their hats and gestured grandly to Madame Defarge. She acknowledged their respect by bowing her head and giving them a quick look. Then she looked casually around the wine shop and calmly went back to her knitting.              

 ìGood day, gentlemen,î said her husband, who had been watching her carefully. ìThe apartment you had asked about while I was out is on the fifth floor. The doorway of the staircase opens out onto a little courtyard close to the left here, near the window of my shop,î he said, pointing with his hand. ìBut now I remember that one of you has been there before and can lead way. Goodbye, gentlemen!î             

 They paid for the wine and left. Monsieur Defarge was watching his wife knit when the old gentleman came over and asked to speak with him.              

 ìOf course, sir,î Monsieur Defarge said and walked quietly with him to the door.              

 Their conversation was short but to the point. Almost at the first word, Monsieur Defarge jumped to attention. Moments later, he nodded and went out. The gentleman motioned to the young lady, and they also went out. Madame Defarge kept knitting and pretended not to notice.              

 Mr. Jarvis Lorry and Miss Manette came out of the wine shop and joined Monsieur Defarge in the doorway he had just directed the three customers to. It opened onto a dark, stinking little courtyard that served as the public entrance to many houses, where a great number of people lived. In the gloomy tiled entry to the gloomy tiled staircase, Monsieur Defarge bent down on one knee in front of the child of his old master and kissed her hand. Though the gesture was kind, he didn't do it kindly. In just a few seconds, he had changed. His face was no longer pleasant or friendly, but had become secretive, angry, and dangerous.          

 ìIt is very high up, and a little difficult to get to. Itís best to start slowly,î Monsieur Defarge said in a stern voice to Mr. Lorry as they began to climb the stairs.             

 ìIs he alone?î Mr. Lorry whispered.             

 ìAlone? God help him, who would be with him!î said Monsieur Defarge, in the same quiet voice.              

 ìIs he always alone?î             

 ìYes.î             

 ìBy his own choice?î             

 ìHe needs to be. Heís been the same since I first saw himósince they found me and asked if I would take care of him in secret.î             

 ìHas he changed much?î             

 ìChanged!î             

 Monsieur Defarge stopped to hit the wall with his hand, and he cursed. No direct answer could have been half as effective. Mr. Lorryís mood grew grimmer as he and the two others climbed the stairs.              

 An old staircase like this one, located in the older and more crowded parts of Paris, would be bad enough   today 1859  today . But back then they were particularly disgusting, especially to people who werenít used to them. Every little apartment in one of these large buildings that opened onto the public staircase dumped its garbage on the landing. Other refuse got thrown out the windows. This unmanageable and hopeless pile of rotting garbage would have polluted the air even if it had not been the garbage of the poor, but the combination of trash and poverty made the smell almost unbearable. The three people walked through all this filth and up a steep, dark, dirty stairwell. Giving in to his own troubled thoughts and to Miss Manetteís anxiety, which became greater every moment, Mr. Jarvis Lorry stopped twice to rest. Each stop was made near a miserable air vent, through which any clean air that was left seemed to escape, and through which rotten air seemed to enter. Through the air vents you could taste, rather than see, parts of the neighborhood. Nothing nearby, from that spot to the great towers of Notre Dame, showed any signs of good health or good thoughts.              

 At last they reached the top of the staircase, and they stopped for the third time. They still needed to climb a steeper, narrower upper staircase to reach the attic. The owner of the wine shop walked a little ahead of them and always stayed next to Mr. Lorry, as though afraid the young lady might ask him a question. He turned around and carefully removed a key from the pocket of the coat he carried over his shoulder.              

 ìThen the door is locked, my friend?î asked Mr. Lorry, surprised.             

 ìOh, yes,î Monsieur Defarge answered seriously.             

 ìYou think itís necessary to keep the poor gentleman locked up?î             

 ìI think itís necessary to turn the key,î Monsieur Defarge whispered in his ear, and frowned heavily.              

 ìWhy?î             

 ìWhy! Because he has been locked up for so long that he would be afraid, go mad, tear himself apart, die, or some other terrible thing if his door were left open.î             

 ìIs that possible?î exclaimed Mr. Lorry.             

 ìIs that possible!î repeated Defarge, bitterly. ìYes, and what a wonderful world we live in when such a thing is possible, and not only possible, but happensóactually happens!óevery day. Long live the devil. Letís keep going.î             

 They spoke too quietly for the young woman to hear, but by now fear and anxiety shook her so much that Mr. Lorry felt he should reassure her.              

 ìBe brave, miss! Courage! This is business! The worst part will be over in a moment. Itís just walking into a room, and the worst is over. Then, all the goodness, all the relief, all the happiness youíll bring him will begin. Let our good friend here help you. Our good friend Monsieur Defarge. Come, now. Business, business!î              

 They went up slowly and quietly. The staircase was short, and they were soon at the top. As they rounded a sharp turn in the staircase, they suddenly saw three men. Their heads were bent down close together at the side of the door, and they were intently looking into the room through some cracks in the wall. When they heard footsteps approach, the three men turned and stood up. They were the three men named Jacques who had been drinking in the wine shop.              

 ìI forgot about them when your visit surprised me,î explained Monsieur Defarge. ìGo away, my friends; we have business here.î             

 The three men slipped past and went silently downstairs.              

 Since there didnít appear to be any other doors on that floor, and the wine-shop owner went straight to this one when they were alone, Mr. Lorry asked him in a whisper, a little angry:             

 ìAre you making a spectacle of Monsieur Manette?î             

 ìI show him, in the way you just saw, to a select few.î             

 ìIs that proper?î             

 ìI think itís proper.î             

 ìWho are the few? How do you select them?î             

 ìI select true men. Men with my name, Jacques, who would benefit from seeing him. I wonít say anymore. You are English. You wouldnít understand. Please wait there for a moment.î             

 He motioned for them to stay back, then leaned over and looked in through the crack in the wall. Soon he raised his head and knocked two or three times on the dooróapparently just to make noise. For this same reason, he dragged the key across the door three or four times before clumsily putting it in the lock and loudly turning it.              

 He slowly opened the door slowly, looked into the room, and said something. A quiet voice answered back. Neither person spoke much more than a syllable.          

 Defarge looked back over his shoulder and motioned for them to enter. Mr. Lorry felt Miss Manette sink so he put his arm around her waist.              

 ìA-a-a-business, business!î he said, with a tear on his cheek that had nothing to do with business. ìCome in!î             

 ìIím afraid of it,î she answered, trembling.              

 ìOf ëití? Of what?î             

 ìI mean of him. Of my father.î             

 Concerned by the state she was in and by the gesturing of Monsieur Defarge, Mr. Lorry pulled her arm around his neck, lifted her slightly, and rushed her into the room. He sat her down just inside the door and held her as she clung to him.              

 Defarge took out the key, closed the door, and locked it from the inside. Then he took the key and held it in his hand. He did all of this methodically, making as much noise as he could. Finally he crossed the room to the window, where he stopped and turned around.              

 The attic had been built to be a storage room for firewood and other things. It was dim and dark. The window was actually a door in the roof, with a small pulley over it for lifting things from the street. There were no windowpanes, and it had two pieces that met in the middle to close it, like any other French door. To keep out the cold, one half of the door was closed tight, and the other was opened very slightly. Such a small amount of light came through that it was hard to see anything when one first entered the room. It would have taken a long time to adjust to the darkness enough to be able to do any kind of detailed work there. Yet, that kind of work was being done in the attic. With his back to the door and his face toward the window where Monsieur Defarge stood looking at him, a white-haired man sat on a short bench, bent over and very busy, making shoes.          

 ìGood day!î said Monsieur Defarge to the white-haired man, who was bent over making shoes.              

 The man looked up for a moment and answered quietly, as if he were far away:             

 ìGood day!î             

 ìYou are still hard at work, I see?î             

 After a long pause, the man looked up and answered. ìYes, I am working.î This time the man raised his haggard eyes up to him before looking down again.          

 His voice was so quiet it was pitiful and dreadful. It wasnít quiet because the man was physically weak, although being locked up and treated badly had done their part. His voice was quiet because he had been kept alone and hadnít used it. It was like the last feeble echo of a sound made a long, long time ago. It had lost so much of its liveliness and sound that it was like a beautiful color that has faded away to a faint stain. It was so low that it sounded like it was coming from underground. It was so sad and hopeless that it would have reminded a starving traveler, exhausted by wandering in the wilderness, of his home and friends just before he lied down to die.              

 The man worked silently for a few minutes. His tired eyes looked up again, not with any interest or curiosity, but mechanically, and he noticed that Monsieur Defarge had not yet left.              

 ìI want to let a little more light in here,î said Defarge, who was still staring at the shoemaker. ìCan you handle a little more light?î             

 Monsieur Manette stopped working. He looked down at the floor beside him with a vacant air of listening, then at the floor on the other side of him, then up at Monsieur Defarge.              

 ìWhat did you say?î             

 ìCan you stand a little more light?î             

 ìI must stand it, if you let more in,î he said, slightly stressing the word     must.             

 Defarge propped the half door open a little more. A broad shaft of light came into the attic and revealed the shoemaker with an unfinished shoe in his lap as he paused his work. A few basic tools and some leather scraps were around him at his feet and on the bench. He had a white, ragged beard that wasnít very long, a thin face, and very bright eyes. The emptiness and thinness of his face would ordinarily have made his eyes look large under his dark eyebrows and tangled white hair. But they were naturally large, so now they looked unnaturally big. His yellow, tattered shirt was open at the throat, showing that his body was skinny and worn out. The old man, his old coat, his baggy stockings, and his tattered clothes had all been away from light and air for so long that they had turned a single shade of yellow, making it hard to distinguish one from the other.              

 He raised his hand to shield his eyes from the light, and even the bones of it seemed transparent. He had stopped working and sat there with a steady, empty look. He never looked at the man in front of him without first looking down on this side of himself, then on the other, as if he had forgotten how to tell where sound was coming from. He never said anything without doing this first, then forgetting to speak.              

 ìAre you going to finish that pair of shoes today?î asked Defarge, motioning to Mr. Lorry to come forward.              

 ìWhat did you say?î             

 ìDo you plan on finishing that pair of shoes today?î             

 ìI canít say that I plan to. I guess so. I donít know.î             

 The question reminded him of his work, and he bent over the shoes and started working again.             

 Mr. Lorry moved forward silently, leaving Miss Manette by the door. After he had stood next to Defarge for a minute or two, the shoemaker looked up. He didnít seem surprised to see another person, but the shaky fingers on one of his hands moved to his lips as he looked at him. (His lips and nails were both the same pale lead color.) Then he dropped his hand back to the shoes and started working again. This look and action happened in an instant.              

 ìYou have a visitor, you see,î said Monsieur Defarge.              

 ìWhat did you say?î             

 ìThere is a visitor here to see you.î             

 The shoemaker looked up as he had before, but without taking his hand off the shoes.              

 ìCome!î said Defarge. ìHere is a man who knows a well-made shoe when he sees one. Show him that shoe youíre working on. Take it, monsieur.î             

 Mr. Lorry took the shoe in his hand.             

 ìTell this man what kind of shoe it is and who made it.î             

 There was a longer pause than usual before the shoemaker answered:             

 ìI forget what you asked me. What did you say?î             

 ìI said, wonít you describe to this man what kind of shoe it is?î             

 ìIt is a ladyís shoe. It is a young ladyís walking shoe. Itís in the latest style. Iíve never seen the style, but Iíve had a pattern to work from.î He looked at the shoe with a slight hint of pride.              

 ìAnd who made it?î asked Defarge.              

 Now that he didnít have the shoes to hold onto, he kept wringing his hands and stroking his beard. Every time he finished speaking, the manís mind would wander off again. Trying to keep his attention was like trying to revive a person who had fainted, or like trying to keep a dying man alive to get information from him.              

 ìDid you ask me what my name was?î             

 ìYes, I did.î             

 ìMy name is One Hundred and Five, North Tower.î             

 ìIs that it?î             

 ìOne Hundred and Five, North Tower.î             

 With a weary sound that wasnít a sigh or a groan he resumed working, until the silence was broken again.              

 ìYouíre not a professional shoemaker, are you?î asked Mr. Lorry, staring at him.             

 The man looked wearily at Defarge as if he wanted him to answer the question for him. When Defarge didnít respond, the man looked at the ground and then back at Mr. Lorry.              

 ìAm I professional shoemaker? No, I was not a professional shoemaker. I-I learned how to make shoes here. I taught myself. I asked permission toÖî             

 He stared off for a few minutes, wringing his hands the whole time. Slowly he looked back toward Mr. Lorry. When he looked at him he flinched and started up again as if he had just been woken up and was continuing a conversation from the night before.             

 ìI asked permission to teach myself, and after fighting with them a long time they let me. I have been making shoes ever since. ì             

 He held out a hand for the shoe that Mr. Lorry was holding. Mr. Lorry was still staring at him.              

 ìMonsieur Manette, donít you remember me?î asked Mr. Lorry.              

 Monsieur Manette dropped the shoe and sat staring at Mr. Lorry.             

 Mr. Lorry put his hand on Defargeís arm. ìMonsieur Manette,î Mr. Lorry said, laying his hand upon Defargeís arm, ìdonít you remember this man? Look at him. Look at me. Do you not remember an old banker? Some old business? An old servant? A time long ago, Monsieur Manette?î             

 As the man whoíd been imprisoned for many years sat looking intently at Mr. Lorry and Defarge, some signs of intelligence that had been hidden for a long time started to break through. They were cloudy and weak and they came and went, but they were there. The young woman had crept along the wall to where she could see him. The exact same expression that was on the old manís face was on her face. She stood there looking at him. At first she had raised her hands in fear, to keep him away or hide him from her sight. Now she was reaching out toward him, trembling eagerly to embrace the poor man and give him life and hope with her love. The expression on her pretty, young face was so much like the one on his (though stronger on hers) that it looked as if it had been passed like a beam of light from his face to hers.              

 His mind clouded over again. He looked at the two men with less and less understanding, and his eyes wandered back to the ground the way they had before. Finally, sighing deeply, he picked up the shoe and went back to work.              

 ìDid you recognize him, monsieur?î whispered Defarge.             

 ìYes. For just a second. At first I thought it was hopeless. But I have definitely seen, for one moment, the face that I once knew very well. Quiet! Letís move back a little. Quiet!î             

 Miss Manette had moved away from the attic wall and was very close to the bench he sat on. There was something terrible about the fact that he was unaware of someone so close she could have reached out and touched him.              

 No one said a word. No one made a sound. She stood next to him like a ghost as he bent over his work.              

 After a while he put down the tool in his hand to pick up his shoemakerís knife. It was on the side of the bench opposite where she stood. He had picked it up and was leaning over to start working again when he noticed the bottom of her dress. He looked up and saw her face. Mr. Lorry and Defarge started to move forward to protect her, but she stopped them with a motion of her hand. She didnít fear him stabbing her with his knife, though the two men did.              

 He stared at her with a frightened look. After a while he started to form words with his lips, although he wasnít making any sound. Little by little, in between his quick, heavy breaths, he said:             

 ìWhat is this?î             

 With tears running down her face, she blew him a kiss with both hands. Then she placed her hands on her heart as if she were holding his head to it.              

 ìYou arenít the jailerís daughter?î             

 ìNo,î she sighed.             

 ìWho are you?î             

 Still afraid to speak, she sat down next to him on the bench. He pulled away, but she placed her hand on his arm. As she did, a strange excitement struck him, and passed through him visibly. He gently put down the knife and sat there staring at her.              

 Her long, curly blond hair had been brushed aside and fell down over her neck. Moving his hand toward her little by little, he picked up her hair and looked at it. While doing this, his mind wandered again, and with another deep sigh, he went back to his shoemaking.             

 This didnít last long, though. Letting go of his arm, she placed her hand on his shoulder. He looked at it suspiciously two or three times, as if to make sure it was really there. Then he laid down his work, reached his hand up to his neck, and removed a black string with a folded scrap of rag tied to it. Carefully he unfolded it on his knee. Inside were one or two long golden hairs, which he had wrapped around his finger long ago.              

 He took her hair in his hand again and looked closely at it. ìItís the same. How can that be! When! How!î             

 As the intense expression reappeared on his forehead, he seemed to realize that the same expression was on her forehead too. He moved her into the light and looked at her.              

 ìThe night I was taken away, she had put her head on my shoulder. She was afraid I was going away, though I wasnít. When they brought me to the North Tower they found these hairs on my sleeve. ìëWill you leave them with me?í I asked. ëThey canít help me escape this place physically, though they may help me escape spiritually.í Those were the words I said. I remember them very well.î             

 He formed these words silently with his lips many times before he could say them out loud. When he did finally speak them, he said them clearly, though slowly.              

 ìHow did this happen? WAS IT YOU?î             

 Once again the two men jumped as the old man turned toward her suddenly. But she sat completely still there as he held onto her and only said quietly, ìPlease, gentlemen, donít come near us. Donít speak. Donít move.î             

 ìListen!î Monsieur Manette cried. ìWhose voice was that?î             

 He let go of her as he yelled this out and tore at his white hair in a frenzy. This fit died down, much like everything had died out of him over the years except for his interest in shoemaking. He folded up the rag and tried to tie it around his neck again. He was still looking at her and sadly shaking his head.          

 ìNo, no, no. You are too young. Too full of life. It canít be you. These are not the hands she knew, this is not the face she knew, this is not a voice she ever heard. No, no. She was, and he was, before all those slow-moving years I spent in the North Toweróyears ago. What is your name, my gentle angel?î             

 Noticing that he had softened his tone of voice and behavior, his daughter fell down on her knees in front of him and placed her hands on his chest.          

 ìOh, sir! Some other time I will tell you my name, and who my mother was, and who my father was, and how I never knew their awful story. But I canít tell you right now, not here. All I can ask right now is that you touch me and give me your blessing. Kiss me, kiss me! Oh my dear, my dear!î             

 His cold white hair mixed with her shining blond hair, and it was as if her hair warmed his like the light of freedom shining on him.             

 ìIf my voiceóI donít know if it does, but if soóif it reminds you of a voice that was once sweet music in your ears, cry for it! If touching my hair reminds you of the head that once rested on your chest when you were young and free, cry for it! If I hint that a home awaits you where I will take care of you, and it reminds you of the long-empty home you remembered from afar, cry for it!î             

 She hugged him around the neck and rocked him back and forth like a child.          

 ìI tell you that your agony is over, and that Iíve come here to take you from it, and that weíre going to England to be at peace. If that causes you to think of your wasted life, and how our home country, France, has mistreated you, cry for it! When I tell you my name, and about my father who is living, and about my mother who is dead, if you find out that I must beg my fatherís forgiveness because I didnít stay awake crying all night since my mother never told me of his imprisonment, cry for it! Cry for her, then, and for me! Gentlemen, thank God! I feel Godís tears on my face and his sobbing in my heart. Thank God!î             

 He had fallen into her arms and rested his head on her chest. The two men were so moved by the sight, and by knowing all the injustice and suffering that had happened before it, that they covered their faces to hide their tears.              

 When it had been quiet in the attic for a while and the old man had stopped shaking and gave in to the calm that follows any storm, the two men stepped forward. They lifted the man and his daughter up off the ground. He had slowly fallen to the floor and lay there exhausted. She had settled down with him, keeping her arm under his head. Her hair was draped over his face and shielded him from the light.              

 Miss Manette raised her hand to Mr. Lorry, as he stooped over them after repeatedly blowing his nose, and said, ìIf we can do it without upsetting him, I would like to leave for Paris right away.î             

 ìBut do you think he is fit to travel?î asked Mr. Lorry.             

 ìMore fit to travel, I think, than to stay in this city, where he has been treated so terribly.î             

 ìItís true,î said Defarge, who was kneeling nearby. ìMore importantly, Monsieur Manette will be safer outside of France. Should I hire a carriage and horses?î             

 ìThatís a business matter,î said Mr. Lorry, going back to his professional demeanor. ìAnd if business needs to be done, then I should be the one to do it.î             

 ìThen will you please leave us here?î asked Miss Manette. ìYou see how calm he is now, and you canít be afraid to leave me here with him. Why should you be? If you will lock the door so no one can bother us, Iím sure you will find him as calm when you return as he is now. In any case, Iíll take care of him until you get back, and then we will move him right away.î             

 Both Mr. Lorry and Defarge thought this was a bad idea and thought one of them should stay. But someone needed to find a carriage and horses and traveling papers. The day was almost over, and they were running out of time. The two men finally decided to divide up these tasks between them, and they hurried off to do them.             

 As it grew dark, the young woman lay her head down on the hard ground next to her father and watched him. It got darker and darker, and they both lay there quietly until a light shone through the cracks in the wall.              

 Mr. Lorry and Monsieur Defarge had made all the arrangements for the journey. They had brought traveling cloaks and blankets, as well as bread and meat, wine, and hot coffee. Monsieur Defarge put these items, and the lamp he was carrying, on the shoemakerís bench (there was no other furniture in the attic except for a simple bed). He and Mr. Lorry woke up the old man and helped him to his feet.          

 No one would have been able to tell from the blank, frightened look on his face what the man might have been thinking. No one would have been able to tell if he knew what had happened earlier, if he remembered what they had said to him, or if he knew that he was free. They tried speaking to him, but he was so confused and slow to answer that they worried he was incoherent and decided to leave him alone. He kept grabbing his head in his hands wildly in a way that he had not been doing before. Yet, he seemed pleased by the sound of his daughterís voice and would turn toward her when she spoke.              

 In the way of a man used to obeying orders, he ate and drank what they gave him, and put on the cloak and other clothes they gave him to wear. He happily let his daughter link arms with him and held her hand with both of his.             

 They began to go downstairs, Monsieur Defarge going first with the lamp and Mr. Lorry coming last. They hadnít gone many steps down the long main staircase when the old man stopped and looked around at the roof and walls.              

 ìDo you remember this place, father? Do you remember coming up here?î             

 ìWhat did you say?î             

 But before she could repeat the question, he mumbled an answer.              

 ìDo I remember? No, I donít remember. It was such a long time ago.î             

 It was clear that he had no memory of being brought from the prison to the house. They heard him mumble, ìOne Hundred and Five, North Tower,î and he looked around, apparently searching for the prison walls that had held him captive for so long. When they reached the courtyard he instinctively changed his stride, as if he were expecting to come upon a drawbridge. When there was no drawbridge and he saw the carriage waiting in the street, he let go of his daughterís hand and grabbed his head again.              

 No crowd was gathered around the door. No one could be seen at any of the many windows. No one even happened to be walking by on the street. Everything was strangely silent. Only one person could be seen, and that was Madame Defarge. She leaned against the doorframe, knitting and pretending to see nothing.          

 Monsieur Manette got into a coach and his daughter followed him. Mr. Lorry was about to get in when the old man asked pitifully for his shoemaking tools and unfinished shoes. Madame Defarge yelled to her husband that she would get them. Still knitting, she went out of the lamplight and through the courtyard. She brought them back quickly and passed them into the coach, and then she immediately went back to leaning against the doorframe, knitting and pretending to see nothing.              

 Defarge climbed up on the coach and yelled, ìTo the barrier!î The driver cracked his whip, and the coach drove off under the dim swinging streetlamps.          

 They drove through the streets under the swinging streetlamps, which were brighter in the richer neighborhoods and dimmer in the poorer ones. They passed well-lit shops and coffee houses, festive crowds, and theaters, until they arrived at one of the city gates. There they came upon some soldiers with lanterns at a guardhouse. ìGive us your papers, travelers!î ìSee here then, Monsieur Officer,î said Defarge, getting down from the coach and taking the soldier aside. ìThese papers belong to the white-haired man inside. They were put in my care, along with the man, at theóî He lowered his voice. There was some movement among the soldiersí lanterns, and one of the soldiers shined his lantern inside the coach. The soldier looked carefully at the white-haired old man. ìItís all right. Move on!î said the soldier. ìGoodbyeî said Defarge. And so they continued on, under a short line of streetlamps that grew dimmer and dimmer, until they were out under the stars.              

 Beneath the starsósome so far from earth that experts tell us their light may not have even reached us yetóthe shadows of the night were large and black. All through the cold and restless night they whispered in the ears of Mr. Jarvis Lorry, as he sat across from the man who had been buried and then dug out. He wondered how much of Monsieur Manetteís senses had been lost forever, and how much of them he could get back. The shadows whispered the same question as before:             

 ìDonít you want to be brought back to life?î             

 And he got the same answer as before:             

 ìI donít know.î             

 The end of Book One.              

 Tellsonís Bank near Temple Bar was an old-fashioned place, even back in 1780. It was very small, very dark, very ugly, and very uncomfortable. The partners who ran the bank were old-fashioned too. They were proud of its smallness, darkness, ugliness, and discomfort. They even boasted that their bank was all these things, and they believed that it if hadnít been so unpleasant, it wouldnít have been so well respected. The bankers liked to brag about this to their competitors. Tellsonís Bank, they would say, didnít need elbow room or bright light or fancy decorations. Maybe Noakes and Co. or Snooks Brothers needed these things, but not Tellsonís Bank!              

 Any one these partners would have disinherited his own son for suggesting they refurbish Tellsonís. In this way, Tellsonís was like England, which did often punish its citizens for trying to improve laws and customs. But the fact that people had objected to these laws and customs for so long made them more respected.              

 In this way, Tellsonís Bank had become the ideal of inconvenience. You entered by struggling to push open the creaky old front door, then tripping down two steps to find yourself in the depressing little place. There were two little counters where extremely old men would take your check in their shaky hands and read your signature by the light coming through the dirty windows. These windows were always covered in the mud from Fleet Street and were made even darker by their iron bars and the shadow of Temple Bar. If you needed to see the head of the bank, you were sent to something like a holding cell, where you could think about your wasted life until the head of the bank came in with his hands in his pockets. He took your money out of, or put it into, rotten old dusty wooden drawers. Your money smelled old and stale, as if the bills were rotting. Your silverware was stored among this filth, and the putrid environment would quickly ruin its polish. Property deeds were stored in old kitchens and washrooms that had been turned into vaults, and all their moisture evaporated into the banking-house air. Boxes of family documents were stored upstairs in a room with a giant dining table, on which dinner was never served. Here, even back in 1780, old love letters and letters from your children would just have been spared the horror of being stared at by the severed heads placed on top of Temple Bar, the kind of barbarous act you would expect to see in ancient Abyssinia or Ashanti.          

 But at that time, putting things to death was fashionable in every profession, especially at Tellsonís Bank. Death is natureís cure for everything, including legal matters. Anyone who forged documents, wrote bad checks, or opened someone elseís mail was put to death. Anyone who stole as little as forty shillings and sixpence was sentenced to death. Anyone who stole a horse from the front of Tellsonís Bank or who made fake money was sentenced to death. The people who handled three-quarters of all the money used in crime were put to death. Not that it did any good in preventing new crimes. In fact, it probably had the opposite effect. But it simplified each case and tied up any loose ends in each matter. So Tellsonís Bank, in its heyday, had been responsible for the deaths of so many people that if you had placed all of their heads on top of Temple Bar instead of disposing of them privately, they would have blocked out the sunlight from the bankís ground floor entirely.              

 The old men who worked in the cramped quarters of Tellsonís Bank took their work seriously. When the bank hired a young man, they hid him away until he was old. When they hired a young man at Tellsonís London office, they kept him in a dark place and aged him, like a cheese, until he had the Tellson-flavor and mold grew on him. Only then was he allowed to be seen there, studying large books and strutting around with an air of self-importance.              

 Outside of the bank was a man who did odd jobs and sometimes acted as a porter or messenger. He never came inside, unless he was called in for a particular purpose. This man was like a living shop sign for the bank. He was always there during business hours unless he was out on an errand. If he was away, his son, a dirty twelve-year-old scamp who looked just like his father, took his place. People knew that the bank put up with this man. The bank always had someone working in this position, and through time and fate, this man had ended up with the job. His last name was Cruncher, and when he was baptized in the easterly parish church of Houndsditch, he had been given the first name of Jerry.              

 It was seven-thirty on a windy March morning in Mr. Cruncherís apartment in Hanging Sword Alley, Whitefriars. The year was   Anno Domini The Year of Our Lord  Anno Domini  1780. (Mr. Cruncher always called it ìAnna Dominoes.î Apparently he thought the year of our Lord started the year the game of dominoes was invented by a woman named Anna.)             

 Mr. Cruncherís apartment was not in a very good neighborhood. It had only two rooms, and only if a closet with a tiny window counted as one of them. He kept his apartment clean, though. As early as it was this windy March morning, his bedroom was already scrubbed clean, and the cups and saucers were set out for breakfast on a clean white tablecloth.              

 Mr. Cruncher was asleep under a patchwork quilt, like a   Harlequin a clown from Italian comedy that wore a costume made up of multicolored patches  Harlequin  at home. He was sleeping heavily, but little by little he began to toss and turn in bed, with his spiky hair looking like it would tear his sheets to shreds. Finally he sat up and yelled out in frustration:             

 ìBust me, if she isnít at it again!î             

 A neatly dressed woman quickly got up off her knees in the corner, with enough speed and fear to show that she was the woman he referred to.             

 ìWhat!î said Mr. Cruncher, looking around the bed for his boot. ìYouíre at it again, are you?î             

 After shouting at her a second time, her threw his boot at her. His boot was covered in mud, and that mud said a lot about Mr. Cruncherís other ways of making money. While he usually came home after banking hours with clean boots, he often went out again at night, and when he woke up the next morning his boots would be covered with clay.              

 ìWhat,î said Mr. Cruncher, after he missed her with the boot. ìWhat are you up to, you aggravator?î             

 ìI was only praying.î              

 ìPraying! Youíre a nice woman! What are you doing throwing yourself down on your knees and praying against me?î             

 ìIím not praying against you. I was praying for you.î             

 ìNo, you werenít. And if you were, I wonít be made a fool of.î Cruncher then spoke to their son. ìYour motherís a nice woman, Young Jerry,î he said sarcastically, ìpraying that your father will fail. Youíve got a devoted mother, very religious, kneeling down and praying that the food will be taken away from her only child.î             

 Mr. Cruncherís son, who hadnít gotten dressed yet, turned away from his mother. He did not like the fact that his mother was praying that his food be taken away.              

 ìAnd how important do you think your prayers are, you arrogant woman?î asked Mr. Cruncher. ìHow much do you think theyíre worth?î             

 ìThey come from the heart, Jerry. Theyíre only worth what they mean to me.î             

 ìTheyíre not worth much, then,î said Mr. Cruncher. ìNo matter what theyíre worth, I wonít have you praying against me. I canít afford it. Iím not going to be made unlucky by your sneaking around. If you must throw yourself down on your knees and pray, pray for your husband and child, not     against them. If my wife and this boyís mother didnít know how to use magic, I might have made some money last week instead of being cursed into having the worst of luck. B-u-u-ust me!î said Mr. Cruncher, who had been getting dressed all this time. ìIf I havenít had the worst luck this week that any honest businessman ever had. Get dressed, Young Jerry, and watch your mother while I clean my boots. If you see her get down on her knees to pray again, let me know. Iím warning you,î he said to his wife, ìI wonít be abused this way. Iím weak, Iím tired, Iím sore, and yet I havenít made any money for all my troubles. I suspect that youíve been praying all day and night to keep me from making any money, and I wonít put up with it, you aggravator! What do you say about that?î             

 Muttering other phrases like ìOh, yes! Youíre a religious woman, arenít you? You would never go against the best interests of your husband and child, would you? Not you!î and making other such sarcastic comments, Mr. Cruncher went about cleaning his boots and getting ready for work. Meanwhile, his son, whose hair was slightly less spiked than his fatherís and whose eyes were close together like his fatherís, watched his mother as he had been told. He kept surprising her by jumping out of his little bedroom where he was washing up and yelling, ìYou were about to kneel down and pray, Mother. Hey! Father!î and then, after yelling out this false warning, jumping back into the other room again with a grin.              

 Mr. Cruncher was still in a bad mood when he came to eat breakfast. He was particularly angry when Mrs. Cruncher said grace.             

 ìWhat are you up to now, aggravator! Are you at it again?î              

 His wife explained to him that she was only asking for a blessing.             

 ìDonít do it!î said Mr. Cruncher while he looked around, as if he expected his wifeís prayers to make the loaf of bread on the table disappear. ìIím not going to let myself be blessed out of house and home. I wonít let you bless my food right off of my table. Keep quiet!î             

 Blurry-eyed and sullen, as if he had been up all night at a party that had ended badly, Jerry Cruncher ate his breakfast anxiously, growling over it like an animal. Around nine oíclock he calmed himself down and, making himself as respectable and professional looking as he could, went out to start his day.          

 You could barely call his work skilled labor, even though he liked to describe himself as an ìhonest businessman.î His only equipment was a wooden stool made from a broken chair. His son, young Jerry, carried the stool every morning as he walked at his fatherís side and placed it under the bank window closest to Temple Bar. He would take a handful of straw from the first vehicle that passed and use it to keep his feet warm and dry, and that was where Mr. Cruncher worked. Here at his position, Mr. Cruncher was as familiar to the people in Fleet Street and the Temple Bar area as Temple Bar itself.              

 Jerry took up his position there at 8:45 this windy March morning, just in time to tip his three-cornered hat to the oldest clerks of Tellsonís Bank as they came into work. His son stood next to him when he wasnít wandering through Temple Bar looking for boys who were smaller than himself to pick on. Jerry and young Jerry, looking very much like each other, silently watched the morning traffic on Fleet Street. Their heads were as close together as each oneís eyes were, making them look like a pair of monkeys. Increasing their resemblance to monkeys was the fact that Jerry chewed on and spat out pieces of straw. His son watched him, and everything else on Fleet Street, carefully.             

 One of the regular messengers that worked in the bank poked his head out the door and said:             

 ìWe need a porter!î             

 ìHooray, Father! Hereís an early job to start the day with!î             

 Having sent his father off, young Jerry sat on the stool, looked at the straw his father had been chewing on, and thought.             

 ìMy fatherís fingers are always so rusty!î mumbled young Jerry. ìWhere does he get all that iron rust on him? He doesnít get any iron rust on him working here at the bank!î             

 ìYou know the   Old Bailey street in London where criminals were tried and imprisoned  Old Bailey , donít you?î one of the bankís oldest clerks asked Jerry.          

 ìYe-es, sir,î answered Jerry, warily. ìI do know the Old Bailey.î             

 ìI thought so. And you know Mr. Lorry.î             

 ìI know Mr. Lorry much better than I know or ever wish to know the Old Bailey. Iím an honest businessman.î He answered as if he were a reluctant witness standing trial.             

 ìGood. Go find the door where they bring the witnesses in, and show the doorman this note for Mr. Lorry. He will let you in.î             

 ìInto the courtroom, sir?î             

 ìYes. Into the courtroom.î              

 Mr. Cruncher narrowed his eyes, as if his eyes were asking each other, ìWhat do you think about this?î              

 ìShould I wait for him in court, sir?î Mr. Cruncher asked.             

 ìIíll tell you. The doorman will pass your note to Mr. Lorry. Get Mr. Lorryís attention and let him know that youíre there. Then wait there until he needs you.î             

 ìIs that all, sir?î             

 ìThatís all. He wants a messenger nearby. Your job is to let him know that youíre there if he needs you.î             

 The elderly clerk folded and addressed the note. Mr. Cruncher watched him in silence until he had sealed the paper. Then he said:             

 ìI guess theyíre trying people for forgery this morning?î             

 ìNo. Treason!î             

 ìThatís punishable by   quartering dismembering a body into four parts  quartering ,î said Jerry. ìHow barbaric!î             

 ìItís the law,î answered the old clerk, surprised at this comment. ìThe law is the law.î              

 ìItís a harsh law. Itís bad enough to kill him, but itís worse to torture him, sir.î             

 ìNonsense,î answered the old clerk. ìItís a good law. My advice is to take care of your own health, my friend, and let the law take care of itself.î             

 ìItís this damp weather, sir, that affects my health,î said Jerry. ìMy job often requires me to be out in wet weather.î             

 ìWell, we all have different ways of earning a living. Some of us have wet jobs and some of us have dry jobs. Here is the letter. Get going.î             

 Jerry took the letter. He bowed respectfully to the man, but under his breath he muttered, ìYouíre a mean, skinny old man.î Jerry told his son where he was going and left for the Old Bailey.              

 In those days they hanged people at Tyburn, so   Newgate where they hanged people in Dickensís time  Newgate  didnít have a bad reputation yet. But the jail was a terrible place, where all kinds of evil and wickedness happened. Diseases were spread throughout the jail. Sometimes the diseases were carried by the prisoners into the courtroom and spread to the Lord Chief Justice himself. There were times when the judge became deathly ill while he was sentencing a man to death and even died before the prisoner was executed. For everyone else, the Old Bailey was a like a deadly inn, where travelers left in carts and coaches on their way to their deaths. They would travel some two and a half miles through the public streets where people would line up to watch them pass. The Old Bailey was also famous for wise, old traditions like the   pillory a device used for public punishment; it included holes for confining a prisoners head and wrists  pillory  and the whipping post. Watching a person being whipped could make the observer feel hardened and less human. The Old Bailey was also famous for   blood money paying a witness to provide evidence that leads to a personís conviction  blood money , another wise, old tradition that led to some of the worst crimes ever committed. All in all, the Old Bailey illustrated the saying, ìthe way something has always been done must be the right way.î Unfortunately, this lazy saying also implied that any different way must be wrong.             

 Jerry Cruncher walked through the crowd like a man who was used to moving quietly. He found the door he was looking for and handed his letter through it. In those days people paid to see the trials at the Old Bailey, just like they paid to go to the theater or to visit the Bedlam insane asylum. The Old Bailey, however, cost much more, so the doors were well guarded. The only exception was the door through which the criminals entered, which was kept wide open.              

 After a few moments, the doorman reluctantly opened the door a little way and allowed Mr. Jerry Cruncher to squeeze into the courtroom.             

 ìWhat case is this?î Jerry whispered to the man next to him.             

 ìNothing yet.î             

 ìWhat case is next?î             

 ìThe treason case.î             

 ìThe one where theyíre going to quarter the man?î             

 ìYep!î answered the man excitedly. ìTheyíll hang him for a while, and then theyíll take him down, cut him open, disembowel him, and burn his intestines right in front of his eyes so he can watch. Then theyíll cut his head off and cut his body into four pieces. Thatís the punishment.î              

 ìIf they decide heís guilty, you mean?î asked Jerry.             

 ìOh, theyíll decide heís guilty,î said the other man. ìDonít you worry about that.î             

 Mr. Cruncher noticed the doorkeeper, who was moving toward Mr. Lorry with the note in his hand. Mr. Lorry was sitting at a table with several gentlemen in wigs. Sitting near them were the prisonerís lawyer, who had a big pile of papers in front of him, and another man who had his hands in his pockets and kept looking at the ceiling. Jerry got Mr. Lorryís attention by coughing loudly and gesturing a few times. Mr. Lorry, who had stood up to look for him, nodded to Jerry and then sat down again.              

 ìWhatís he got to do with this case?î the man next to Jerry asked about Mr. Lorry.             

 ìI have no idea,î said Jerry.              

 ìWhat do you have to do with it, if I may ask?î             

 ìI donít know that either,î said Jerry.             

 The judge entered and everyone in the court got settled. Jerry and the man stopped talking. Everyone focused their attention on the dock, where the prisoner was to stand trial. Two jailers who had been standing there went out of the room. They came back with the prisoner and brought him to the bar.              

 Everyone stared at him except for the wigged gentleman who was still staring at the ceiling. People peeked around pillars and corners to get a glimpse of him. Those in the back rows stood up for a better look. People standing on the ground floor stood on their tiptoes or tried to push themselves up on other peopleís shoulders. Jerry, noticeable by his spiked hair, stood among them. His breath smelled of the beer he had drunk on his way there. It mixed with the smells of gin, tea, and coffee that came from the breaths of the other people in the crowd. The breath of the crowd steamed up the windows of the courthouse.          

 They were all staring at a young man about twenty-five years old, tall and good-looking, with sunburned cheeks and dark eyes. He looked like a young gentleman. He was dressed plainly in black or very dark gray. His hair was long and dark and was tied in a ribbon at the back of his neck, more to keep it out of his face than for the sake of fashion. Although he was sunburned, his cheeks were pale from nervousness. Otherwise, he appeared confident. He bowed to the judge and stood quietly.              

 The way the crowd ogled the man was not flattering for the human race. If his sentence wasnít such a horrible oneóif there were any chance that he would be spared from any of the terrible things that were set to happen to himópeople would have lost interest. People had come to see the body that was soon to be horribly mutilated, butchered, and torn to pieces. Whatever these people told themselves as to why they were there, the truth was they were there out of a morbid fascination.              

 The judge began: ìSilence in the court! Yesterday Charles Darnay pleaded ënot guiltyí to the charge of treason. He has been charged with betraying England and our king by helping King Louis of France in the wars against England on many occasions. He is charged with traveling between England and France and telling King Louis what forces we planned to send to Canada and North America.î Jerry, to his satisfaction, soon figured out that Charles Darnay was the man standing trial, that they were swearing in the jury, and that the attorney general was about to speak.              

 The prisoner didnít flinch or act out in any way, although he knew that every person in the courtroom was already picturing him being hanged, beheaded, and cut into pieces. He stood quietly, paying close attention to the court proceedings. He rested his hands on the slab of wood in front of him. He was so calm that he didnít disturb the vinegar and herbs, which had been scattered throughout the courtroom to protect everyone against disease.              

 A mirror hung over the prisonerís head to reflect light down onto him. Over the years this mirror had reflected the images of many poor and wicked prisoners who had eventually been put to death. If that mirror were ever able to send those reflections back out, the courtroom would have been filled with ghosts. The prisoner may have thought about how disgraceful it was to have this mirror there. He shifted and a shaft of light shining across his face made him look up. When he saw his reflection, he blushed and brushed the herbs off of the bar in front of him.              

 As he made this gesture, he turned his face to his left. His eyes fell upon two people sitting near the judgeís bench. His expression changed so much when he saw them that everyone who was watching turned to look.              

 The two people were a young lady a little older than twenty years old and a gentleman who was apparently her father. He was a remarkable-looking man with white hair and an indescribable intensity in his face. This intense expression made him look like an old man. But when the expression left his face, as it had now while he talked to his daughter, he looked handsome and in the prime of his life.              

 His daughter sat arm in arm with her father. Her fear and pity for the prisoner had made her pull close to him. The expression on her forehead revealed her compassion for the prisoner. This expression was so heartbreaking that it moved even those people who had had no pity for the prisoner. The crowd whispered to one another, ìWho are they?î             

 Jerry, who had been observing the scene while he sucked the rust off of his fingers, leaned in to hear who they were. The crowd around him had passed the question forward to the person closest to the two people. The answer was slowly passed back until it got to Jerry:             

 ìThey are witnesses.î             

 ìFor which side?î asked Jerry.              

 ìAgainst.î             

 ìAgainst which side?î             

 ìAgainst the prisoner.î             

 The judge turned to look at the two witnesses and called them to the stand. Then he leaned back in his chair and looked at the prisoner. The attorney general stood to state his case, to prove the man guilty and send him to his death.             

 The attorney general told the jury that, although the prisoner was a young man, he had been involved in treasonous activities for many years. It wasnít as if he had committed treason for the first time that day, or the day before, or even the year before. He had been traveling between France and England for quite a long time on secret business. If traitorous acts ever succeeded (which luckily they never did), he might have never been caught. But Fate had caused a brave, honest man to investigate this man and pass the information on to the authorities. This good and patriotic man, with the most noble attitude, would be brought before the jury. The attorney general said that the man had once been a friend of the prisoner. But once he had learned of his evil doings, he decided to turn his friend in. He said that if statues were built in Britain to honor great citizens, as they were in ancient Greece and Rome, then there would surely be a statue erected of this man. Unfortunately, though, this was not done in England. He told the jury that virtue, which poets write about, was contagious. (He said the jurors were sure to know the poems by hearts, but judging by their looks, the jury didnít.) The most contagious of virtues was patriotism, or love of oneís country. This man was a prime example of a patriot, and just talking about him was an honor. His patriotism led the prisonerís servant to go through his masterís desk drawers and pockets, and to look though his papers. The attorney general was ready to hear others discredit this servant for betraying his master, but he personally believed him to be a better person than his own brothers and sisters, and he respected him more than his own mother and father. He advised the jury to think similarly of the servant. The attorney general explained that the testimony from these two men, along with the documents they had discovered, would prove that the prisoner had had lists of the strength and location of British forces, both at sea and on land, and that he had given this information to the enemy. He explained that these lists were not in the prisonerís handwriting but that this only helped the prosecution because it proved that he had been cautious. They would prove that he had been passing this information for five years, and had already started to do so a few weeks before the first battle between British troops and colonists in America. For these reasons, the loyal, responsible citizens of the jury had no choice but to find the prisoner guilty and sentence him to death, whether they wanted to or not. The members of the jury, as well as their wives and children, could never sleep soundly again unless the jurors sentenced the prisoner to have his head chopped off. The attorney general ended by demanding that they find him guilty in the name of everything good and decent, and he said he already considered the prisoner as good as dead.              

 When the attorney general finished, the crowd started to buzz with excitement, like a cloud of flies, in anticipation of the prisonerís death. When the noise died down, the ideal patriot the attorney general had described entered the witness box.              

 The solicitor general, following the attorney generalís lead, examined the witness: a gentleman named John Barsad. He described himself exactly as the attorney general had described him. In fact, his description was almost too similar. After he had been examined, he would have modestly gotten down from the witness box. But the wigged gentleman with the stack of papers, who was seated next to Mr. Lorry, stopped him. The other wigged gentleman, sitting across from him, was still staring at the ceiling.              

 The man asked John Barsad if he had ever been a spy himself. No, Barsad answered indignantly. How did he make his living? He made his living off of his property. Where was his property? He didnít quite remember. What was this property? No oneís business. Had he inherited it? Yes, he had. From whom? A distant relative. Very distant? Yes, very distant. Had he ever been in prison? Of course not. He had never been to debtorís prison? He didnít see what that has to do with it. So heíd never been to debtorís prison? He asked that the question be repeated. Never been to debtorís prison? Yes. How many times? Two or three times. Not five or six times? Maybe. Whatís your profession? I am a gentleman. Have you been ever been kicked in a fight? Maybe. Often? No. Ever been kicked down a flight of stairs? Of course not. Once, though, someone kicked me at the top of a staircase and I happened to fall down the stairs on my own. Were you kicked because youíd been caught cheating at dice? Thatís what the drunken liar who kicked me said, but it wasnít true. You swear it wasnít true? Definitely. Ever make money by cheating at gambling? Never. Ever make money by gambling? No more than other gentlemen. Ever borrow money from the prisoner? Yes. Ever pay him back? No. Wasnít your familiarity with the prisoner actually very limited, created by you deliberately bumping into him in coaches, inns, and ships? No. Are you sure you saw the prisoner with these lists? Iím sure. You didnít know anything else about these lists? No. You didnít get them yourself, for instance? No. Do you expect to get anything in return for testifying against him? No. Youíre not employed by the British government to entrap people? Of course not. Or to do anything else? No. You swear? Iíll swear it over and over again. You have no motives for doing this other than love for your country? None whatsoever.              

 The examination of the trusted servant, Roger Cly, went quickly. He had started working for the prisoner four years earlier. He met the prisoner on the boat to Calais and had asked him if he wanted a servant. The prisoner gave him a job. He hadnít offered to work for the man for freeósuch a thing had never occurred to him. Shortly afterward he had become suspicious of the prisoner and started watching him closely. He had often seen lists, similar to the ones given as evidence, in the prisonerís pockets while he was arranging his clothes. He had taken these lists out of the drawers of the prisonerís desk. He had not put them there himself. He had seen the prisoner show the same lists to French gentlemen in Calais and Boulogne. He loved his country and couldnít stand to see such treachery, so he told the authorities. He denied that he had once been suspected of stealing a silver teapot. He had once been accused of stealing a mustard pot, but it was only silver plated, not solid silver. He had known the other witness for seven or eight years. That was just a coincidence and not at all strange. He also didnít think it was strange that his only motive for giving evidence was pure patriotism, like the other witness. He was a loyal British subject and hoped there were many like him.             

 There was another buzz in the courtroom, and the attorney general called Mr. Jarvis Lorry to the stand.              

 ìMr. Jarvis Lorry, are you a clerk at Tellsonís Bank?î             

 ìI am.î             

 ìOn a certain Friday night in November 1775, did your job require that you take the mail coach from London to Dover?              

 ìIt did.î             

 ìWere there any other passengers in the coach?î             

 ìTwo other passengers.î             

 ìDid they get out of the coach at some point during the night?î             

 ìYes, they did.î             

 ìMr. Lorry, look at the prisoner. Was he one of those two passengers?î             

 ìI donít know.î             

 ìDoes he resemble either of the two passengers?î             

 ìBoth of them were bundled up, it was dark, and we all kept to ourselves, so I canít be sure if he looked like one of the passengers or not.î             

 ìMr. Lorry, imagine the prisoner wrapped up like those two passengers. Is there anything about his build or height that would make you think that he was     not one of them?î             

 ìNo.î             

 ìMr. Lorry, you cannot say for sure that he was not one of those two men?î             

 ìNo.î             

 ìSo youíre saying he might have been one of them?î             

 ìYes. Except that I remember them both being afraid of thieves, like I was, and the prisoner doesnít look like a man whoís afraid of anything.î             

 ìDid you ever see someone pretend to be afraid, Mr. Lorry?î             

 ìI certainly have.î             

 ìMr. Lorry, look at the prisoner again. Have you ever seen him before?î             

 ìI have.î             

 ìWhen?î             

 ìI was coming back from France a few days afterward. The prisoner got on board our ship at Calais and came back to England with me.î              

 ìWhat time did he come on board?î             

 ìA little after midnight.î             

 ìIn the middle of the night. Was he the only passenger that came on board so late?î             

 ìYes. He happened to be the only one.î             

 ìForget about whether he ëhappenedí to be the only one. Was he the only passenger to come on board in the middle of the night?î             

 ìYes, he was.î             

 ìWere you traveling alone, Mr. Lorry, or were you with someone?î             

 ìI was with two other people. A gentleman and a lady. They are here in the courtroom.î             

 ìThey are here. Did you speak with the prisoner?              

 ìHardly. The weather was stormy, and the sea was rough. I was lying on the sofa for almost the entire trip.î             

 ìMiss Manette!î the attorney general said.             

 The young woman, whom everyone had been watching earlier, stood up, and the crowd turned to look at her. Her father stood up with her and kept his hand linked through her arm.              

 ìMiss Manette, take a look at the prisoner.î             

 To look at such a young, beautiful woman with such pity in her eyes was harder for the prisoner than the stares of the entire crowd. He couldnít stand still while looking at her, knowing he was about to die and knowing that everyone was watching him. He brushed the herbs in front of him into little lines, like beds of flowers in a garden. His lips trembled as he tried to steady his breathing. The crowd started to buzz again.              

 ìMiss Manette, have you seen the prisoner before?î             

 ìYes, sir.î             

 ìWhere?î             

 ìOn board the ship Mr. Lorry just mentioned. At the same time.î             

 ìYou are the young woman Mr. Lorry referred to?î             

 ìOh! Unfortunately, I am.î             

 ìJust answer the questions simply,î the judge said angrily, cutting off her compassionate voice. ìDonít comment on them.î             

 ìMiss Manette, did you talk to the prisoner at all during the journey across the Channel?î             

 ìYes, sir.î             

 ìDescribe the conversation.î             

 The courtroom was silent as she began quietly: ìWhen the gentleman came on boardóî             

 ìBy ëgentleman,í do you mean the prisoner?î asked the judge, frowning.              

 ìYes, my lord.î             

 ìThen say ëthe prisoner.íî             

 ìWhen the prisoner came on board, he noticed that my father was very tired and weak.î She looked at her father lovingly as he stood beside her. ìMy father was in such bad condition that I was afraid to take him inside, and I made a bed for him on the deck near the cabin steps. I sat beside him taking care of him. We were the only four passengers on board that night. The prisoner was kind enough to suggest a better way to shield my father from the wind and weather. I had not known how to do it since I didnít understand how the wind would blow once we had left the harbor. The prisoner did it for me. He was very gentle and kind toward my father, and Iím sure he was sincere. That is how we started talking.î              

 ìLet me interrupt you for a moment. Did he come on board alone?î             

 ìNo.î             

 ìHow many people were with him?î             

 ìTwo French gentlemen.î             

 ìDid they speak together?î             

 ìThey spoke together until the very last moment, when the two French gentlemen took their boat back to shore.î             

 ìDid they pass any papers between them? Papers similar to these lists?î             

 ìThey passed some papers between them, but I donít know what they were.î             

 ìWere they the same shape and size as these papers?î             

 ìThey might have been, but Iím not sure. They stood close to me, whispering to each other. They were at the top of the cabin steps, near the light of the lamp. The lamp was dim, and they spoke very quietly. I did not hear what they said. I could only see that they were looking at some papers.î             

 ìTell us about your conversation with the prisoner, Miss Manette.î             

 ìBecause I was helpless, the prisoner was as open and honest with me as he was kind and helpful to my father.î She burst into tears. ìI hope that I will not repay him today by doing him harm.î             

 The courtroom buzzed with excitement.              

 ìMiss Manette, everyone here, except maybe the prisoner, understands that you do not want to give this evidence today. You know, though, that it is your duty to do so. Please continue.î             

 ìHe told me that he was traveling on business of a delicate and difficult nature that could get certain people into trouble. Because of this, he was using a false name. He said that this business had required him to go to France on short notice and that he might need to travel back and forth between France and England for a long time to come.î             

 ìDid he say anything about America, Miss Manette? Be specific.î             

 ìHe tried to explain to me how the conflict in America had developed. He said that, in his opinion, it was wrong and foolish for England to fight. He joked that George Washington might someday be as famous a man in history as Englandís King George III. But he didnít mean any harm by this. He was only joking to pass the time.î              

 A crowd will always mimic the expression on the face of an actor in a play they are watching. Miss Manetteís forehead was wrinkled up as she gave her evidence, waited for the judge to write down what she said, and watched the lawyers to see how they would react. All the people in the crowd had the same expression on their foreheads, as if they were mirrors reflecting Miss Manette. The judge looked up, angered by the comment about George Washington.              

 The attorney general signaled to the judge that he needed to call the young womanís father to testify. The judge agreed, and Dr. Manette was called to the stand.              

 ìDr. Manette, look at the prisoner. Have you ever seen him before?î             

 ìYes, once. He came to my home in London about three or three and a half years ago.î             

 ìCan you identify him as the man you met on board the boat from Calais, or verify that he had this conversation with your daughter?î             

 ìI canít do either, sir.î             

 ìIs there some reason why?î             

 ìThere is,î he answered quietly.             

 ìDid you spend a long time in prison in France, Dr. Manette, without a trial or even being officially accused?î             

 ìA long imprisonment,î he answered in a tone that provoked pity.             

 ìHad you just been released on the night in question?î             

 ìThatís what they tell me.î             

 ìDo you remember that night?î             

 ìNot at all. I donít remember anything from a long periodóI canít even say how long. Iíve forgotten everything from the time when I was making shoes in prison to when I found myself living in London with my daughter. I began to recognize her when I started to get my senses back. I have no memory of how it happened, though.î              

 The attorney general sat down, and so did Dr. Manette and his daughter.          

 An important fact then came up in the case. The attorney general wanted to prove that the prisoner rode with some unknown accomplice in the Dover mail coach that Friday night in November five years earlier and got out sometime in the night. From there he backtracked about twelve miles or more to a military post and dockyard, where he gathered information. They called a witness who said he saw the prisoner around that time waiting for someone in the coffee room of the hotel in the town, near the military post and dockyard. The prisonerís lawyer cross-examined this witness and learned nothing except that the witness had never seen the prisoner before this time. Then, the wigged gentleman who had been staring at the ceiling the whole time wrote a word or two on a small scrap of paper, crumpled it up, and threw it at the prisonerís lawyer. The lawyer opened the piece of paper, paused, and looked curiously at the prisoner.              

 ìYouíre sure you saw the prisoner?î he asked the witness.             

 The witness said he was sure.              

 ìHave you ever seen anyone who looked like the prisoner?î             

 ìNot so much like him that I could confuse the two,î said the witness.              

 ìLook closely at my esteemed friend over there,î he said, pointing to the man who had tossed the paper. ìNow look closely at the prisoner. Do they look like each other?î             

 Except for the fact that the friend had a sloppy, unkempt appearance, the two men looked enough alike that the witness and everyone in the courtroom were surprised to notice it. The judge asked the man to take off his wig, and once he did they looked even more alike. The judge asked Mr. Stryver, the prisonerís lawyer, if they were going to try Mr. Carton, the other man, for treason. Mr. Stryver answered that no, they would not. But he would ask the witness that, if this could happen once, could it have happened another time, and if he would have been so confident if this resemblance had been pointed out sooner. As a result, the credibility of the witness was completely ruined and his testimony became useless.              

 By this time, Mr. Cruncher had eaten a lot of rust off of his fingers while following the evidence. Now he listened as Mr. Stryver, the prisonerís lawyer, tried to convince the jury of the prisonerís innocence. He told them that the ìpatriot,î Barsad, was actually a hired spy and a traitor. He said that he was being paid to help convict the man and sentence him to death, and that Barsad was one of the worst scoundrels since Judas, who he even looked like. He said that the prisonerís supposedly virtuous servant, Cly, was actually a friend and partner of Barsadís and as bad a man as he was. He said that Barsad and Cly had chosen the prisoner as their victim because he often traveled between France and England on family business. This business was so delicate that he could not discuss it, even at the risk of death, for the sake of protecting his loved ones. He explained that the evidence the young woman had so reluctantly given added up to nothing but small talk between two strangers. His comment about George Washington was so outrageous that it could only have been a sick joke. He said the attorney general was trying to capitalize on publicís hatred and fear, and it would be a shame for the government to rule on this basis. Still, he said, the evidence didnít prove anything. It was the type of false evidence that was often seen in cases where people were accused of committing crimes against the state. At that point the judge interrupted and said that he could not stand to hear such offensive comments.              

 Mr. Stryver then called a few witnesses. Mr. Cruncher listened while the attorney general told the jury that everything Mr. Stryver had told them was wrong. Barsad and Cly were better men than he had originally thought, and the prisoner was a much worse man than he had originally thought. Finally, the judge himself spoke. He said some things in favor of the prisoner, and other things against him. Overall, his remarks made the prisoner appear to be guilty.             

 At this point, the jury gathered to discuss their verdict. The courtroom buzzed with conversation.              

 Mr. Carton, who had been staring at the ceiling for some time, didnít move or change his expression, even amid the excitement. Meanwhile, Mr. Stryver piled up the papers in front of him and whispered with the people near him. Occasionally he glanced anxiously at the jury. The crowd milled about. The judge got up from his seat and paced back and forth on his platform. But Carton sat there, leaning back with his torn gown half on, his messy wig placed sloppily on his head, his hands in his pockets, and his eyes turned to the ceiling. There was something reckless and dishonorable about him. He was so disheveled that he didnít look as much like the prisoner as he had before, when he had been serious for a moment. Many in the crowd now said that they didnít look so much alike after all. Mr. Cruncher commented to the man next to him, ìI bet he doesnít get any work as a lawyer. He doesnít look like the type to get any, does he?î             

 But Mr. Carton was paying closer attention to the scene than it appeared. When Miss Manette dropped her head onto her fatherís chest, he was the first person to say loudly, ìOfficer! Assist that young woman. Help the gentleman take her out of the room. Canít you see sheís about to faint?î             

 The crowd was very sympathetic to her and her father as they left the courtroom. It had apparently been very stressful for him to think back on his time in prison. The questioning had clearly upset him, and that thoughtful or brooding expression that made him look older had been on his face ever since. As he was leaving, the foreman spoke on behalf of the jury, who were once again facing forward.              

 The jury had not come to a decision and wanted to go away to deliberate further. The judge, perhaps thinking about the prisonerís comment about George Washington, was surprised. But he signaled that they could go away under careful supervision, then he left the courtroom himself. The trial had lasted all day and the lamps in the court were being lit. A rumor spread that the jury would be deliberating for a long time. The spectators took a break and left the courtroom, and the prisoner moved to the back of the dock and sat down.              

 Mr. Lorry, who had left the courtroom with Miss Manette and her father, now came back in and motioned to Jerry. Jerry could now get near him easily since the crowd had left.              

 ìJerry, you can go get something to eat, but stay close by. Iím sure you will hear when the jury comes in. Get back here as soon as they do. I want you to take the verdict back to the bank. Youíre the fastest messenger I know, and youíll get back to Temple Bar much faster than I can.î             

 Mr. Lorry gave him a shilling, and Jerry agreed to deliver the message. At that moment, Mr. Carton came up to Mr. Lorry and tapped him on the arm.             

 ìHow is the young lady?î             

 ìSheís very upset, but her father is comforting her. She feels better now that she is out of the courtroom.î             

 ìIíll tell the prisoner. It wouldnít be proper if people saw a respectable banker like you speaking to him in public.î             

 Mr. Lorry blushed as if he had thought of this himself. Mr. Carton went over to the bar where the prisoner was sitting. The exit was in the same direction, and Jerry, with his spiked hair, followed behind him, watching and listening intently.              

 ìMr. Darnay!î said Mr. Carton.              

 The prisoner immediately stepped forward.             

 ìIím sure you are anxious to hear how the witness, Miss Manette, is doing. She is doing very well. She got through the worst of it.î             

 ìI am very sorry that I caused her distress. Could you tell her for me, with my sincerest apologies?î             

 ìYes, I will tell her if you want me to.î             

 Mr. Cartonís attitude was so casual that it was almost rude. He stood there, partly facing away from the prisoner, leaning with his elbow against the bar.             

 ìI would like that. Thank you.î             

 ìWhat verdict do you expect, Mr. Darnay?î Carton asked, still only partly facing him.             

 ìGuilty.î             

 ìItís smart of you to expect that, as itís the most likely. But I think their long deliberation could work in your favor.î             

 Jerry didnít hear any more of their conversation, since he wasnít allowed to hang around. He left the two men, who looked so much like each other but were so different in their behavior, standing next to each other and reflected in the mirror above them.             

 An hour and a half went by slowly. The scoundrels in the crowd passed the time eating and drinking. Jerry, seated uncomfortably on a bench after eating dinner, had dozed off, when the murmuring crowd swept him up and carried him with them into the courtroom.              

 ìJerry! Jerry!î Mr. Lorry was already calling for him when he arrived.              

 ìIím here, sir! Itís a fight to get back through this crowd. Here I am, sir!î          

 Mr. Lorry handed a piece of paper to him through the crowd. ìQuick! Do you have it?î             

 ìYes, sir.î             

 The word Acquitted had been quickly scribbled down on the paper.             

 ìIf you had sent the message ëBrought back to lifeí again I would have understood it this time,î muttered Jerry.              

 Jerry didnít have time to say or think anything else until he was out of the Old Bailey. The crowd came pouring out of the courtroom so quickly that they nearly knocked him over, and their loud buzz spread into the streets as if they were flies in search of other carrion.             

 The last few spectators were leaving the dim corridors of the courthouse. Dr. Manette and his daughter, Lucie, as well as Mr. Lorry, the solicitor for the defense, and the defense lawyer, Mr. Stryver, gathered around Mr. Charles Darnay, who had just been released. They all congratulated him on his escape from the death penalty.             

 In brighter light it would have been difficult to tell that the intelligent looking Dr. Manette was the same man who had been a shoemaker in the attic in Paris. People couldnít help but look twice at him, even when they had not heard his low, sad voice or seen the dazed absentmindedness that overcame him at times without any apparent reason. A single reminder of his time in prison, like what had happened at the trial, could send him into depression. But it could also arise on its own, and send him into a gloomy state of mind. These mood changes were completely surprising to people who did not know his troubled history. It was as if the shadow of the   Bastille a large prison in Paris  Bastille  were on him, even though the building was three hundred miles away.              

 Only his daughter could bring him back from this melancholy brooding. She was the one thing that connected his past, before his imprisonment, to his present. The sound of her voice, the look on her face, or the touch of her hand almost always made him feel better. There had a few times when she hadnít been able to help him, but these instances were rare and she felt they were now over.              

 Mr. Darnay kissed her hand passionately and gratefully, and thanked Mr. Stryver warmly. Mr. Stryver was not much older than thirty, but he looked fifty. He was fat, loud, red, and crude. He had a way of shoving himself, morally and physically, into groups and conversations, just as he was shoving his way up in the world.             

 Mr. Stryver still wore his wig and gown, and he stood in front of Mr. Darnay in such a way that Mr. Lorry was edged out of the conversation entirely. ìI am happy I represented you honorably, Mr. Darnay,î said Mr. Stryver. ìIt was a villainous case they had against you, but that doesnít mean they couldnít have succeeded.î             

 ìI am indebted to your for life, in two senses of the word,î said Mr. Darnay, shaking his hand.              

 ìI did my best for you, Mr. Darnay, though I only did as well as any other man would have.î             

 It was obvious that someone was expected to say, ìYou did much better than any other could have,î so Mr. Lorry said it, hoping to squeeze himself back into the conversation.             

 ìDo you think so?î asked Mr. Stryver. ìWell! Youíve been here all day and you ought to know. Youíre a businessman, too.î             

 Mr. Stryver had now pushed Mr. Lorry back into the group, just as he had pushed him out before. ìAnd as a businessman,î said Mr. Lorry, ìI will ask Dr. Manette to break up this conversation and order us all to go home. Miss Lucie looks ill, Mr. Darnay has had a terrible day, and everyone is exhausted.î             

 ìSpeak for yourself, Mr. Lorry,î said Stryver. ìI have work to do tonight. Speak for yourself.î             

 ìI speak for myself, for Mr. Darnay, and for Miss Lucie,î answered Mr. Lorry. ìDonít you think I can speak for all of us, Miss Lucie?î he asked her, glancing at her father.             

 Dr. Manette was looking at Darnay strangely. It was an intense look that grew into a frown of dislike and distrust, mixed with fear. With this expression on his face his mind had wandered off.              

 ìFather.î said Lucie, gently taking his hand.             

 The look faded from his face, and he turned to look at her.             

 ìShall we go home, Father?î             

 ìYes,î he answered with a long sigh.              

 Mr. Darnay had told them that he would not be released that night, so the group went their separate ways. Almost all of the lamps in the hallways had been put out, and the iron gates were noisily being shut. The courthouse would be empty until another crowd arrived the next morning hoping to see people hanged, whipped, branded, or sent to the stocks. Lucie stepped outside and walked between her father and Mr. Darnay. They called a coach, and then Lucie and her father got in and left.              

 Mr. Stryver had left them in the hallway to push his way back to the changing room. A man who had not been in their group and hadnít spoken a word to any of them was leaning against the wall in the shadows. He had silently followed them out and had watched Dr. Manette and his daughter drive away in the coach. Now he came up to where Mr. Lorry and Mr. Darnay were standing on the street.             

 ìSo, Mr. Lorry! Respected businessmen can now be seen talking publicly with Mr. Darnay again?î said Mr. Carton.             

 Nobody had mentioned the role Mr. Carton had played in the events of the day. Nobody had noticed him there. He wasnít wearing his robe anymore and looked worse than he had in the courtroom.              

 ìIf you knew how conflicted businessmen become when they are caught between doing the right thing and the professional thing, you would find it funny, Mr. Darnay,î said Mr. Carton.             

 Mr. Lorry blushed and said in a friendly manner, ìYou have said that before, sir. We men of business, who work for a company, cannot think only of ourselves. We have to think of whatís best for the company.î             

 ìI know, I know,î answered Mr. Carton casually. ìDonít get upset, Mr. Lorry. You are as good a man as any, Iím sure. Better, I might say.î             

 ìReally, sir,î continued Mr. Lorry, ignoring him. ìI donít know what you have to do with any of this. Excuse me for saying so but, as a much older man than yourself, I really donít think itís any of your business.î             

 ìBusiness! I have no business,î said Mr. Carton.             

 ìItís a shame that you donít, sir,î said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìI think so, too.î             

 ìIf you did have business,î continued Mr. Lorry, ìperhaps you could go take care of it.î             

 ìLord bless you. No! I wouldnít do that,î said Mr. Carton.             

 ìWell, sir!î exclaimed Mr. Lorry, angered by Cartonís casual attitude, ìbusiness is a good and respectable thing. Being a businessman sometimes means you have to restrain yourself from doing what you would like to do. Mr. Darnay is a kind young gentleman who understands these things. Good night, Mr. Darnay. God bless you, sir! I hope you have a prosperous, happy life in front of you.   Chair!î a small carriage drawn by one horse  Chair!î  

 Mr. Lorry may have been mad at both himself and Mr. Carton, and he climbed into the chair and headed off to Tellsonís Bank. Carton, who smelled like port wine and appeared to be a bit drunk, laughed and turned to Darnay:             

 ìItís pretty odd that you and I are here together. This must be a strange night for you, standing here alone on the street with a man who looks just like you.î             

 ìI still donít feel like I belong to the world of the living,î answered Charles Darnay.              

 ìIím not surprised. It wasnít long ago that you were close to being put to death. Your voice is weak.î             

 ìI feel weak.î             

 ìThen why donít you eat dinner? I ate dinner myself while those idiots in the jury were arguing about whether you should live or die. Let me show you the closest good tavern.î             

 Mr. Carton took his arm and led Mr. Darnay down Ludgate Hill to Fleet Street and up a covered passageway into a tavern. They were brought into a small room where Charles Darnay soon restored his strength with a simple dinner and some good wine. Carton, still as rude as ever, sat across from him at the same table with his own bottle of port.              

 ìDo you feel like you belong to the world of the living yet, Mr. Darnay?î             

 ìIím quite disoriented, but Iím well enough to feel like I am.î             

 ìYou must be very happy about that!î             

 He spoke bitterly and refilled his large wine glass.              

 ìAs for me,î said Mr. Carton, ìmy greatest wish is to forget that I belong to this world. It has nothing good in store for me except this wine. And I have nothing for it. You and I are very different in that way. Actually, Iím starting to think that you and I arenít that similar after all.î             

 Mr. Darnay was confused by the emotions of the day, and it felt like a dream to be with this man who looked so much like himself, but behaved so roughly. He didnít know how to respond to this statement, and finally, he decided not to answer at all.              

 ìNow that youíve finished eating, Mr. Darnay,î Carton said, ìwhy donít you propose a toast?î             

 ìWhat toast?î             

 ìWhy, itís on the tip of your tongue. You should know what it is. You must. Iím sure you do.î             

 ìTo Miss Manette, then!î             

 ìTo Miss Manette!î             

 Staring into Mr. Darnayís face while he drank to the toast, Carton flung his wine glass over his shoulder against the wall, where it shattered. Then he rang the bell and ordered another.             

 ìThatís a beautiful young lady to send away in a coach at night, Mr. Darnay!î he said, handling his new glass.             

 ìYes,î said Mr. Darnay, frowning slightly.             

 ìHow does it feel to have such a beautiful young woman pity you and weep for you? Is it worth being put on trial for your life to be the object of such sympathy and compassion, Mr. Darnay?î             

 Again Darnay didnít answer.             

 ìShe was very happy to receive your message when I gave it to her. She didnít show that she was pleased, but I think she was.î             

 This comment reminded Darnay that Carton had helped him by delivering this message. He turned the conversation to that fact and thanked him for his help.             

 ìI donít want or deserve any thanks,î he said casually. ìFirst of all, it was nothing. And second, I donít even know why I did it. Let me ask you a question, Mr. Darnay.î             

 ìOf course. Itís the least I could do for your favor.î             

 ìDo you think that I like you?î             

 ìReally, Mr. Carton,î answered Mr. Darnay, a bit flustered by the question, ìI havenít thought much about it.î             

 ìThink about it now.î             

 ìYou have acted as if you liked me, but I donít think you actually do.î             

 ìI donít think I do like you,î said Carton. ìIím starting to think highly of your intelligence.î             

 ìRegardless of whether you like me, there isnít any reason why I shouldnít thank you for your help, and we should part on good terms,î said Mr. Darnay. He got up to ring the service bell.             

 Carton answered, ìNot on your life!î Darnay rang the bell. ìDo you call us even?î Mr. Darnay answered that yes, he did. ìThen bring me another pint of this wine, waiter, and wake me in my room at ten oíclock.î             

 They paid the bill and Charles Darnay got up and wished Mr. Carton good night. Without wishing Darnay good night in return, Mr. Carton also got up and said defiantly, ìOne last thing, Mr. Darnay. Do you think I am drunk?î              

 ìI think you have been drinking, Mr. Carton.î             

 ìYou think? You know I have been drinking.î             

 ìYes, I know it.î             

 ìThen I will tell you why. I am unhappy and overworked, sir. I donít like anyone in the world, and no one likes me.î             

 ìIím sorry to hear that. You might have put your skills to better use.î             

 ìPerhaps, Mr. Darnay. Perhaps not. Donít let your sober self get too excited. You donít know what trouble you might get yourself into. Good night!î             

 When he was alone, Mr. Carton picked up the candle and went over to a mirror hanging on the wall. He looked at himself closely in it.              

 ìDo you like that man?î he mumbled to his reflection. ìWhy should you like a man who looks like you? There is nothing likable about you. You know that. Ah, youíre confused! How much youíve changed! That man reminds you of what you used to be like and what you might have become. Thatís a good reason to like him. If you traded places with him, would Miss Manette have looked at you with her blue eyes the way she looked at him? Would she have been as concerned if you had been on trial? Come on and say it plainly. You hate that man.î             

 He drank his wine to console himself. He drank it all in a few minutes and fell asleep with his head on his arms. His hair was spread out over the table, and candle wax dripped down and covered him like a   winding sheet a sheet that a dead person is buried in  winding sheet .              

 People drank a lot in those days. The situation is better today. The amount of alcohol that a man back then could drink in one night and still remain respectable would seem ridiculous to people today. Lawyers drank as much as people in any other profession. Mr. Stryver, who was already shoving his way to being very wealthy and successful, equaled his peers in drinking just as much as he did in matters of the law.              

 Mr. Stryver had been popular at the Old Bailey and at the   Sessions lower criminal court  Sessions , but he had started to leave his colleagues behind as his ambition drove him forward. The Sessions and the Old Bailey now had to summon him to get him to visit. Mr. Stryver could be seen every day shoving himself past these old colleagues into the view of the Lord Chief Justice in the Court of Kingís Bench, like a sunflower shoving past the nearby flowers toward the sun.              

 It was once said at the bar that although Mr. Stryver was persuasive, immoral, bold, and well prepared, he was not skilled at getting to the core of complex matters, which is one of the most important skills a lawyer needs. He was improving, though. The more cases he worked on, the better he became at finding the crux of an argument. And no matter how late he stayed up drinking with Sydney Carton, he was always well prepared the next morning.              

 Sydney Carton, who was lazy and unimpressive, was Mr. Stryverís greatest asset. You could have kept one of the kingís ships afloat on the amount of liquor the two of them drank together between   Hilary Term and Michaelmas two of the four terms that made up the legal year  Hilary Term and Michaelmas . If Stryver was on a case, Carton was there with his hands in his pockets staring at the courtroom ceiling. They worked on cases for the circuit court, and they stayed up drinking late into the night. Carton could sometimes be seen stumbling back home, disheveled and drunk, in broad daylight. Finally the word got out among other lawyers that while Sydney Carton would never be a lion, he was a great jackal, and this was the service he provided Stryver.              

 ìTen oíclock, sir,î said the man at the tavern. ìTen oíclock, sir.î             

 ìWhatís the matter?î asked Carton.             

 ìTen oíclock, sir.î              

 ìWhat do you mean? Ten oíclock at night?î             

 ìYes, sir. You told me to wake you.î             

 ìOh! I remember. Very well, very well.î             

 After a few feeble attempts to go back to sleep, which the servant prevented by continuously stirring the fire for five minutes, Mr. Carton got up. He put his hat on and walked out. He turned into Temple Bar, and he tried to revive himself by walking back and forth along the street. Then he entered Stryverís home.              

 Stryverís assistant, who never assisted him at these meetings, had gone home, and Stryver opened the door himself. He had slippers on and a loose bed gown. His collar was open to be more comfortable. He had that wild, strained look in his eyes that people of his class who drink too much have had for ages. You could see it in the portraits of   Jeffreys George Jeffreys, a notorious Lord Chief Justice of England  Jeffreys  on down through every Drinking Age.              

 ìYouíre a little late, Memory,î said Stryver.             

 ìIím here around the usual time. Maybe Iím fifteen minutes late.î              

 They went into a dirty little room, filled with books and papers, where there was a blazing fire. A kettle was steaming on the stove, an in the middle of the mess of papers, there was a table with wine, brandy, rum, sugar, and lemons.          

 ìI see youíve already had a bottle of wine, Sydney.î             

 ìTwo tonight, I think. Iíve been eating with todayís client. Or watching him eat. Itís all the same.î             

 ìThat was an important point that you brought up about identifying Mr. Darnay. How did you think of it?î             

 ìI thought that he was rather a good-looking man, and I thought I would have been the same kind of man, if Iíd had any luck.î             

 Mr. Stryver laughed until his belly shook.              

 ìYou and your luck, Sydney! Get to work, get to work.î             

 Mr. Carton loosened his clothes gloomily and went into another room. He came back with a large jug of cold water, a basin, and one or two towels. Dipping the towels in the water and partially wringing them out, he placed them sloppily on his head and sat down at the table. ìNow I am ready!î he said.             

 ìNot much work to be done tonight, Memory,î said Mr. Stryver happily as he looked at his papers.              

 ìHow much?î             

 ìOnly two sets of them.î             

 ìGive me the worst one first.î             

 ìHere they are, Sydney. Fire away!î             

 Mr. Stryver lay down on his back on the sofa on one side of the drinking table. Mr. Carton sat at his own table, which was covered with papers, on the other side, with the bottles and glasses within reach. Both of them were using the drinking table but in different ways. Mr. Stryver was lying back with his hands in his waistband looking at the fire, occasionally looking over some simple document. Mr. Carton, frowning intently, worked so steadily that he didnít even look up when he reached for his glass. He often groped around for it for a minute or two before finding it. Two or three times the business he was working on became so difficult that Mr. Carton had to get up and soak his towels again. He would return from the water basin wearing the strangest combinations of wet towels on his head. These looked especially ridiculous because he was so serious about his work.              

 After a while Mr. Carton put together a small meal for the lion, Mr. Stryver, to eat. Mr. Stryver took it from him carefully. He picked out what he wanted and commented on it, and Mr. Carton responded. After they had discussed the meal, Mr. Stryver put his hands in his waistband again and lied down to think. Mr. Carton would then energize himself with a glass of punch and fresh towels, and put together a second meal. He served it to Mr. Stryver in the same manner, and he didnít finish his work until three in the morning.              

 ìAnd now that weíre finished, Sydney, fill a glass of punch,î said Mr. Stryver.              

 Mr. Carton took the towels off of his head, which was steaming again. He shook himself, yawned, shivered, and did what Mr. Stryver said.              

 ìYou did well with those witnesses for the prosecution today, Sydney.î             

 ìDonít I always do well?î             

 ìIím not questioning it. What has put you in such a bad mood? Have some punch. That will improve your mood.î             

 With a disapproving grunt, Mr. Carton did what he was told.              

 ìYouíre acting just like you did back when we were at   Shrewsbury School a famous school for boys  Shrewsbury School ,î said Stryver, nodding his head as he thought about Mr. Carton in the past and present. ìSydney the seesaw! Up one minute and down the next. In a good mood one minute, in a bad mood the next.î             

 ìAh!î Mr. Carton sighed. ìYes! Iím the same Sydney, with the same bad luck. Even then, I did other boysí homework and rarely did my own.î              

 ìAnd why not?î             

 ìGod only knows. It was just the way I was, I guess.î             

 He sat with his hands in his pockets and his legs stretched out in front of him, looking at the fire.              

 ìCarton,î said Mr. Stryver, turning toward him forcefully as if he could bully him into becoming ambitious. ìYouíve always been lazy. You have no energy or purpose. Look at me.î             

 ìDonít bother me,î answered Sydney, with a somewhat cheerful laugh. ìDonít     you moralize.î             

 ìHow have I done all I have done? How do I do what I do?î             

 ìPartly by paying me to help you, I suppose. But donít bother lecturing me about it. You do what you want to do. You were always on the front lines, and I was always in back.î              

 ìI had to push my way to the front lines. I wasnít born there, was I?î             

 ìI wasnít there at your birth, but I think that you were,î said Carton. He laughed again, and then they both laughed together.              

 ìBefore Shrewsbury, and at Shrewsbury, and ever since Shrewsbury,î continued Carton, ìyou have always been ahead and I have always been behind. Even when we were in Paris studying French and French law, and trying to learn other French things that werenít very good for us, you were always going somewhere and I was always going nowhere.î              

 ìAnd whose fault was that?î             

 ìOn my life, Iím not sure that it wasnít your fault. You were always pushing and shoving and striving ahead. I had no chance but to sit back and waste away. Itís depressing, though, to talk about the past at the beginning of a new day. Change the subject for me before I leave.î             

 ìWell then! Letís talk about that pretty witness,î said Stryver, holding his glass. ìIs that a more pleasant topic?î             

 Apparently it wasnít, for he got depressed again.              

 ìPretty witness,î muttered Carton, staring into his glass. ìIíve had enough of witnesses today and tonight. Which pretty witness are you talking about?î             

 ìMiss Manette, the doctorís beautiful daughter.î             

 ìShe? Pretty?î said Carton.              

 ìIsnít she?î             

 ìNo.î             

 ìWhy, everyone in the courtroom was admiring her!î             

 ìWho cares? Who made the Old Bailey a judge of beauty? She looked like a blond doll.î             

 ìDo you know, Sydney,î said Mr. Stryver, looking at him intently and wiping his face with his hand. ìYou know, during the trial I thought you sympathized with the blond doll, and were interested to see what happened to that blond doll.î             

 ìInterested to see what happened to her? A man can tell if a girl is about to faint right in front of his face. I agree to that, but I deny that sheís beautiful. Iím done drinking. Iím going to bed.î             

 Mr. Stryver followed Mr. Carton with a candle to show him the way down the stairs. The day looked cold through the grimy windows. When he left the house, it was cold and sad outside. The sky was gray and overcast. The river was dark. The whole scene looked like a lifeless desert. Clouds of dust were blowing around in the morning wind, as if the desert sand had risen far away and was about to cover London.              

 Feeling empty, with this desert all around, Mr. Carton stopped as he crossed an empty terrace and stood still. For a moment he imagined a life filled with honor, ambition, sacrifice, and hard work. It was a life filled with hope and possibility. The fantasy lasted only a moment, and then it was gone. He climbed to his room high up in a group of houses. He threw himself down on his unmade bed still wearing his clothes, his pillow wet with tears cried for his wasted life.             

 Sadly, sadly, the sun rose. There wasnít a sadder sight that morning than Mr. Carton, a good man with good skills who was unable to put them to good use. He was unable to help himself or to make himself happy. He was aware of his troubles but had resigned himself to them.              

 Dr. Manetteís quiet apartment was on a quiet street corner near Soho Square. It was a fine Sunday afternoon four months after Mr. Darnayís trial for treason. By now the public had forgotten all about it. Mr. Jarvis Lorry walked along the sunny streets from his home in Clerkenwell to dine with Dr. Manette. After falling back a few times into being consumed by his work, Mr. Lorry had become friends with Dr. Manette, and his visits to Dr. Manette made up the happiest part of his life.             

 On this particular fine Sunday, Mr. Lorry walked toward Soho early in the afternoon for three reasons. First of all, on nice Sundays he often went out for a walk with the doctor and Lucie before lunch. Secondly, on Sundays when the weather was bad, he often spent the day with them as a family friend at their house, talking, reading, looking out the window, and generally getting through the day. Thirdly, he had his own problems to work out, and the time at the doctorís house was a good time to work them out.              

 There wasnít a nicer street corner in London than the corner where Dr. Manette lived. It was a dead end, and there was a pleasant little view of the street from the front windows of his apartment that provided a sense of being away from the commotion. There werenít many buildings north of Oxford Road back then. Trees and wildflowers flourished, and hawthorn grew all over the fields that have since disappeared. Because of this, country air flowed briskly through Soho instead of fading away into the countryside like beggars without a home. There were many peach trees nearby, growing up against the south walls of the buildings.              

 The street corner Dr. Manette lived on was well lit by sunlight early in the day, but in the hot part of the day, the corner was in shade, though not in such a large shadow that you couldnít see past it into the sunlight. It was a cool spot, calm but cheerful. It was a good place to hear echoes and escape the noise of the busy city streets.             

 It was fitting that the doctorís quiet home was on such as a quiet street. He lived in two floors of a large stiff house where several businesses were supposedly open during the day. But they made almost no noise during the daytime, and they were completely silent at night. There was a building in back that was only reachable by a courtyard where a plane tree grew. In the building there was a shop that claimed to make church organs, engrave silver, and make items out of gold. The golden arm of a mysterious giant stuck out of the wall of the front hall, as if he had beaten himself golden and might threaten to do the same to any visitors. Noise was rarely heard from these businesses, or from the one lodger who was said to live upstairs, or from the dumb maker of coach-trimmings who claimed to have an accounting house downstairs. Once in a while a stray workman, putting his coat on, would walk across the hall, or a stranger would come looking around. Sometimes you would hear a clink in the distance across the courtyard or the golden giant would make a thump. These were the only sounds to be heard. Otherwise, the sparrows in the plane tree behind the house and the echoes in the corner were the only sounds to be heard all week.              

 Here, Dr. Manette met with the few patients he had acquired by his old reputation and its revival by the rumors about his imprisonment. His knowledge of science and the clever experiments he conducted also brought him work, and he was able to earn as much money as he wanted.              

 Mr. Jarvis Lorry knew all this about Dr. Manette and had it in mind when he rang Dr. Manetteís doorbell on that fine Sunday afternoon.             

 ìIs Dr. Manette home?î he asked the handmaid who answered the door.              

 The handmaid answered that he was expected home soon.             

 ìIs Miss Lucie home?î             

 The handmaid answered that she too was expected home soon.             

 ìIs Miss Pross home?î             

 The handmade answered that she might be at home but that she couldnít say for sure.             

 ìSince I feel at home here myself, Iíll go upstairs,î said Mr. Lorry.             

 Even though Miss Manette had known nothing about France, she apparently had innately developed the ability to make much of very little, which is one of the most useful and pleasant skills of the French people. Even though it was simply furnished, the room was decorated with many little ornaments. These ornaments werenít expensive, but they were tasteful and interesting and had a delightful effect on the room. The look of everything in the apartment, from the largest to the smallest objects, the color scheme, the elegance of the variety, and contrast of little decorations, were pleasing and expressive of Miss Manetteís taste. So much so that, as Mr. Lorry stood looking around, the furniture seemed to wear the same expression that he had seen so many times on Miss Manetteís forehead. As a result, the tables and chairs themselves seemed to ask him if he liked the way the room had been decorated.             

 There were three rooms on each floor, and the doors of each room had been left open to air them out. Mr. Lorry, smiling as he thought of that resemblance to Lucie Manette that he saw all around him, walked from one room to another. The first room was the nicest. In it were Lucieís pet birds, flowers, books, a desk, a worktable, and a box of watercolor paints. The second room was Dr. Manetteís consulting room, which they also used as a dining room. The third room was the doctorís bedroom. Light filtered in through the leaves of the plane tree outside the window and speckled the walls and floor in shifting patterns. In the corner stood the unused shoemakerís bench and a tray of tools. It looked the same as it had on the fifth floor of that miserable house near the wine shop in the suburb of Saint Antoine in Paris.              

 ìItís strange that he keeps that reminder of his suffering near him,î said Mr. Lorry, looking around.             

 ìAnd why is that strange?î was the unexpected question that made him jump.          

 The question came from Miss Pross. She was the strong, wild, red woman whom he had first met at the Royal George Hotel in Dover. Mr. Lorry got along with her much better now.              

 ìI should have thoughtóî Mr. Lorry began.             

 ìPooh! Youíd have thought!î said Miss Pross, and Mr. Lorry stopped talking.             

 ìHow are you?î the lady then asked. She said it harshly, but still trying to be friendly.             

 ìI am pretty well, thank you,î answered Mr. Lorry meekly. ìHow are you?î             

 ìNothing to brag about,î said Miss Pross.             

 ìIndeed?î             

 ìAh! Indeed!î said Miss Pross. ìI am very unhappy about Miss Manette.î              

 ìIndeed?î             

 ìFor goodness sake, say something besides ëindeed,í or youíll annoy me to death,î said Miss Pross. She had a tendency to be short with people, although she was rather a tall woman.              

 ìReally, then?î said Mr. Lorry, changing his phrase.             

 ìëReallyí is bad, but itís better than ëindeed.í Yes, I am very unhappy.î             

 ìMay I ask why?î             

 ìI donít want dozens of people who are unworthy of Miss Manette coming here to looking for her,î said Miss Pross.             

 ìDo dozens of people come here for that?î             

 ìHundreds,î said Miss Pross.             

 Miss Pross had the habit, like many other people before and after her, to exaggerate her point after someone questioned it.             

 ìDear me!î said Mr. Lorry. It was the safest thing he could think to say.             

 ìI have lived with heróor rather, she has lived with meósince she was ten years old and paid me for it. She certainly shouldnít have if I could have afforded to take care of her or myself for nothing. Itís been very hard,î said Miss Pross.             

 Mr. Lorry didnít understand what exactly was ìvery hard,î so he shook his head. He used this gesture of shaking his head as a kind of magical cloak, which would fit any occasion the way a magical cloak would fit anyone.             

 ìAll sorts of people who are not worthy of her keep showing up,î said Miss Pross. ìWhen you started itóî             

 ìWhen I started it, Miss Pross?î             

 ìDidnít you? Who brought her father back to life?î             

 ìOh! If thatís what you mean by starting itóî said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìIt wasnít ending it, was it? As I was saying, when you started it, it was hard enough. Not that I can blame Dr. Manette, except that he doesnít deserve to have such a daughter. This isnít his fault, for it canít be expected that anyone would be worthy under the circumstances. But it really is two or three times harder to have crowds of people showing up after himóI could have forgiven himóto take Miss Manetteís affections away from me.î             

 Mr. Lorry knew that Miss Pross could be a jealous woman, but he also knew by now that she was, beneath all her odd behavior, unselfish in a way that only women can be. She was the type of woman who would, for love and admiration, commit herself like a slave to a woman. She would commit to a young woman, though she herself was old. Or to a beautiful woman, though she had never been beautiful. Or to a successful woman, though she had no accomplishments. Or to a hopeful woman, though sheíd never had hope in her own life. Mr. Lorry knew enough about the world to know that there is nothing better than true love and devotion that is free from selfish motives. When he thought of the rewards of the afterlife (we all sometimes think of such things), he placed Miss Pross much closer to the lower angels than some of the most beautiful women, either naturally beautiful or who had made themselves beautiful with makeup and fine clothes, who had money at Tellsonís Bank.              

 ìThere has only ever been one man worthy of Miss Manette,î said Miss Pross. ìThat was my brother, Solomon, if he hadnít made a mistake in life.î             

 Mr. Lorryís questions about Miss Prossís personal life had taught him that Solomon was a heartless crook who had taken everything she owned and had lost it in bad investments. He had abandoned her and had left her destitute forever, and had never felt the slightest guilt about it. Mr. Lorry took very seriously Miss Prossís faith in Solomon and the fact that she only blamed him a little bit for this huge betrayal. It had an effect on his good opinion of her.             

 ìAs we happen to be alone here together and are both businesspeople,î he said when they had gone back into the drawing room and had sat down together, ìlet me ask you a question. Does Dr. Manette ever speak to Lucie about his time making shoes in prison?î             

 ìNever.î             

 ìAnd yet he keeps his bench and tools near him?î             

 ìAh! I didnít say he never thinks of it himself,î answered Miss Pross, shaking her head.              

 ìDo you believe he thinks of it often?î             

 ìI do,î said Miss Pross.              

 ìDo you imagineóî Mr. Lorry started, but Miss Pross cut him off with:             

 ìNever imagine anything. Itís better to have no imagination at all.î             

 ìI stand corrected. Do you supposeóyou do suppose still, donít you?î             

 ìNow and then,î said Miss Pross.             

 ìDo you suppose,î continued Mr. Lorry with a twinkle in his eye as he looked at her kindly, ìthat Dr. Manette has any idea as to why he was imprisoned? Or that he perhaps even knows who sent him to prison?î             

 ìI donít suppose anything but what Miss Manette tells me.î             

 ìAnd that isÖ?î             

 ìShe thinks that he does.î             

 ìNow donít get mad at me for asking all of these questions. I am only a dull businessman. You are a businesswoman.î             

 ìDull?î asked Miss Pross calmly.             

 Wishing he hadnít used that adjective to describe himself, he answered, ìNo, no. Surely not. But to get back to business. Isnít it remarkable that Dr. Manette, since he is definitely innocent of any crime, doesnít talk about that question? Not that he should talk about it with me, although we had a business relationship long ago and now we are friends. But with his daughter, whom he is so devoted to and who is devoted to him? Believe me, Miss Pross, I donít bring it up out of mere curiosity, but because I am deeply interested in the matter.î             

 ìWell! As well as I understand it, which is not well at all, he is afraid of the whole topic,î said Miss Pross.             

 ìAfraid?î             

 ìI think itís clear enough why he would be. Itís a dreadful thing to remember. Besides that, he lost part of himself in prison. Not knowing how he lost himself, or how he eventually found himself again, he might never feel certain that he wonít lose himself again. That alone would make it an unpleasant subject, I would think.î             

 It was a more insightful answer than Mr. Lorry had expected. ìTrue,î he said. ìIt would be frightening to remember. Yet I wonder if it is good for Dr. Manette to keep that shut up inside of him. It causes me uneasiness sometimes, which is why I am asking you about it now.î             

 ìIt canít be helped,î said Miss Pross, shaking her head. ìIf you bring up the subject at all, his mood instantly changes for the worse. Itís best to leave it alone. In short, we must leave it alone whether you want to or not. Sometimes he gets up in the middle of the night. We can hear him upstairs pacing up and down in his room. Miss Manette knows that in his mind he is pacing up and down in his old prison cell. She rushes to him and they continue together, pacing up and down, up and down, until he is calm again. But he never speaks a word to her of the real reason for his restlessness, and she thinks its best not to bring it up. They pace up and down together in silence until her love and companionship bring him back to his senses.î              

 Miss Pross claimed not to have an imagination. But there was something in her understanding of being haunted by a single sad idea, and in her repetition of the phrase ìpacing up and down,î that made Mr. Lorry think that she had an imagination after all.             

 The street corner, as was mentioned earlier, was a good place for echoes. Mr. Lorry could now hear the echo of footsteps coming toward them as if the mention of pacing up and down had started it.              

 ìTheyíre here!î said Miss Pross, getting up from her chair. ìAnd soon there will be hundreds of people here to visit Miss Manette!î             

 The acoustics were so strange in the street corner that, as Mr. Lorry stood near the open window, he could hear the doctorís and Miss Manetteís footsteps but still couldnít see them. He thought they would never arrive. Not only would echoes die out as though the doctor and Miss Manette had walked away, but echoes of other footsteps would be heard instead and would die away for good when it seemed like they were close by. Finally, Dr. Manette and Miss Manette appeared and Miss Pross was waiting for them at the door.              

 Though she was wild, red, and grim looking, Miss Pross was a pleasant sight as she took off Miss Manetteís bonnet, wiped it off with her handkerchief, and blew the dust off it when Miss Manette came up the stairs. Miss Pross folded her   mantle a loose, sleeveless cloak  mantle  and laid it out, and she smoothed Miss Manetteís hair with as much pride as if she were a beautiful, conceited woman admiring her own hair. Miss Manette looked pleasant, too, hugging Miss Pross and thanking her. She protested that Miss Pross was taking too much trouble with her, but she only did this playfully, or Miss Pross would have been hurt, and would have gone off to her room alone and cried. The doctor also looked pleasant, watching them and telling Miss Pross how she spoiled Lucie. You could tell from his eyes, though, that he spoiled her too and would spoil her more if he could. Mr. Lorry looked pleasant too, looking at them fondly from under his little wig and thanking his lucky stars that he had found such a lovely home in his later years since, as a single man, he had no family of his own. Mr. Lorry looked for the hundreds of visitors Miss Pross had said would be coming, but no one arrived.              

 By lunchtime still no hundreds of people had arrived. In the management of their little household, Miss Pross was always in charge of the lower floors and did a good job with them. The lunches she made were very modest but were well cooked and well presented. They were so interesting, being half English and half French, that nothing could have been better. Miss Pross, being a very practical woman, would search Soho and other nearby neighborhoods for poor French people, and she would pay them shillings and half crowns to tell her their secret recipes. She had learned such wonderful cooking skills from these poor French men and women that the woman and girl servants at the house thought of her as a witch, or Cinderellaís fairy godmother. She could take a chicken, rabbit, or vegetable from the garden and turn it into whatever she wanted to like magic.          

 On Sundays, Miss Pross ate at the same table as the doctor, but on other days she insisted on eating at unknown times, either downstairs or in her own room on the second floor. Her room was a blue room that no one was allowed to enter except for Lucie. On this occasion, Miss Pross went out of her way to make a good meal to please the beautiful Lucie, so the food was very good.             

 It was a hot day, and after lunch Lucie suggested that they take their wine out under the plane tree, where they could sit in the fresh air. As everyone always did what Lucie wanted, they all went out under the plane tree. Lucie carried the wine down for Mr. Lorry. She had taken on the role of Mr. Lorryís cup bearer, and while they sat under the plane tree talking, she made sure his glass was always full. They could see the backs of other houses from where they sat talking, and the wind blew gently through the leaves of the plane tree above their heads.              

 Hundreds of people still did not arrive. Mr. Darnay came by while they were sitting under the plane tree, but he was the only one.              

 Dr. Manette welcomed him kindly, and so did Lucie. Miss Pross, however, suddenly started twitching in her head and body and went into the house. This often happened to her, and she would refer to it among friends as ìa fit of jerks.î             

 The doctor was in the best health and looked especially young. At such times he looked very much like Lucie. As they sat there, side-by-side, she leaning against his shoulder and he resting his arm on the back of her chair, it was very pleasant to see the similarity.              

 He had been talking all day about all sorts of things in an unusually lively way. ìSay, Dr. Manette,î said Mr. Darnay as they sat under the plane tree, ìhave you seen much of the Tower of London?î He said it in regards to the topic they were discussing at the time, which happened to be the old buildings of London.          

 ìLucie and I have passed by it, but only casually. We have seen enough of it to know that itís very interesting. Thatís all.î             

 ìI have been there, as you know,î said Darnay, smiling, though his face turned a bit red with anger, ìin a different way, and not in a way that allows someone to see much of it. They told me something interesting when I was there.î             

 ìWhat was that?î asked Lucie.              

 ìSome workmen stumbled upon an old dungeon while they were making renovations. It had been built over and forgotten for many years. On every stone of the inner wall there were inscriptions of dates, names, complaints, and prayers that had been carved by prisoners. On a stone in a corner, one prisoner, who it seems was eventually executed, had carved three letters. They were carved with a dull instrument, and they were done in a hurry with an unsteady hand. At first they read the letters as D.I.C., but when they looked more carefully the last letter turned out to be a G. There was no record of a prisoner being there with those initials, and no one could guess what the name could have been. After a long time it was suggested that the letters werenít initials, but the word dig. They examined the floor carefully under the inscription, and in the ground, under a stone or tile in the floor, they found the ashes of a paper mixed with the ashes of a small leather bag. What the prisoner had written on the paper will never be known. But he had written something and had hidden it from the jailer.î              

 ìFather! Youíre sick!î cried Lucie.              

 Dr. Manette had jumped up suddenly, with his hand to his head. His behavior and look frightened them.              

 ìNo, my dear. Iím not sick. There are large drops of rain falling, and they made me jump. We had better go inside. ì             

 He recovered almost immediately. Rain really was falling in large drops, and he showed them the rain drops on the back of his hand. But he didnít say a word about the discovery Mr. Darnay had mentioned. As they went into the house, Mr. Lorryís analytical eyes saw, or thought they saw, the same look on the doctorís face, as he turned it toward Charles Darnay, as he had when he had turned toward him in the hallways of the courthouse at the Old Bailey.             

 The look vanished so quickly, however, that Mr. Lorry doubted that he had seen anything at all. The doctor was now steadier than the arm of the golden giant in the hallway. He stopped under it to say that he was still vulnerable to slight surprises (he might always be), and the rain had surprised him.              

 At teatime, while Miss Pross made tea, she had another twitching fit like she had before, and hundreds of people had still not arrived to visit Miss Manette. Mr. Carton had arrived, but he was only the second person to come by.              

 It was such a hot night that, although they had the doors and windows open, they were overpowered by the heat. When they were done with the tea table, they all moved to one of the windows and looked out into the dusk. Lucie sat by her father, Darnay sat beside her, and Carton leaned against the window. The wind from the thunder gusts blew the long, white curtains up near the ceiling like the ghostly wings.              

 ìThe rain is still falling in large, heavy, sparse drops,î said Dr. Manette. ìThe drops come slowly.î             

 ìThe storm is on its way,î said Carton.             

 They spoke quietly, the way people speak when they are waiting for something, the way people speak in a dark room while waiting to see lightning.             

 People were running through the streets trying to get inside before the storm broke. The street corner was filled with the echoes of footsteps coming and going, even though no one could actually be seen walking there.              

 ìIt sounds like so many people, and yet no one is there!î said Darnay after they had listened for a while.             

 ìIsnít it impressive, Mr. Darnay?î asked Lucie. ìSome nights I have sat here until I have imaginedóbut even something silly I have imagined makes me shudder tonight, when everything is so dark and seriousóî             

 ìLet us shudder too. Tell us what it is.î             

 ìIt will seem like nothing to you. Such ideas are only interesting as we make them up, I think. They shouldnít be told to others. I have sometimes sat here alone at night, listening until I have imagined that all of the echoes are the echoes of the footsteps of the people that will soon be coming into our lives.î             

 ìA lot of people will be coming into our lives if thatís the case,î added Sydney Carton in his moody way.             

 The footsteps never stopped. They sped up more and more, and the corner echoed and re-echoed with their sound. Some seemed to be under the windows, and some seemed to be in the room. Some were coming and some were going. Some of them were breaking off and some stopped altogether. All were in the streets in the distance, and no one was in sight.              

 ìAre all these people making these footsteps destined to come to all of us here? Or do we divide them among us?î             

 ìI donít know, Mr. Darnay. I told you it was my silly imagination, but you asked to hear it. When Iíve let my mind wander like this, Iíve been alone, and then Iíve imagined that they were the footsteps of the people who will come into my life. And my fatherís life.î             

 ìIíll accept them into my life!î said Carton. ìI ask no questions and have no conditions. There are a lot of people coming toward us, Miss Manetteóand I can see them by the lightning.î He added the last words just after a bright flash of lightning, which illuminated him as he lounged in the window.              

 ìAnd I hear them!î he added, after a roar of thunder. ìHere they come, fast, fierce, and furious!î             

 He was talking about the rush and roar of rain, and he stopped talking because he couldnít be heard over the rain. A terrific storm of thunder and lightning broke, and the thunder, lightning, and rain did not stop even for an instant until after the moon rose at midnight.              

 The bell at Saint Paulís Cathedral struck one oíclock in the now clear air. Mr. Lorry headed home to Clerkenwell, escorted by Jerry, who wore high boots and carried a lantern. There were lonely parts of the road on the way between Soho and Clerkenwell, and Mr. Lorry worried about thieves and always used Jerry for a ride home, though he usually headed home two hours earlier.              

 ìWhat a night it has been!î said Mr. Lorry. ìAlmost a night that would bring the dead out of their graves, Jerry.î             

 ìIíve never seen a night that would do that. And I donít expect to,î answered Jerry.             

 ìGood night, Mr. Carton,î said Mr. Lorry. ìGood night, Mr. Darnay. Do you think weíll ever see such a night together again?î             

 They might. They might also see a great roaring crowd of people come rushing at them, too.              

 The monseigneur, one of the great and powerful lords of the court, held a reception every two weeks at his grand hotel in Paris. The monseigneur was in his private room, and the crowd of people in the outer rooms worshipped the monseigneur and treated his private room like a holy sanctuary. The monseigneur was about to have his chocolate. He could swallow anything easilyóa few unhappy people were even saying that he was quickly swallowing all of Franceóbut he couldnít eat his morning chocolate without the help of four strong men, as well as the cook.              

 Yes, it took four men. All of them were dressed extravagantly, and the one in charge had two gold watches in his pocket, following the monseigneurís noble and chaste example. One servant carried the pot of chocolate to the monseigneur, the second stirred up the chocolate with a little instrument, a third brought him his napkin, and a fourthóthe one with two watchesópoured out the chocolate. The monseigneur couldnít have gotten rid of one of these servants without losing his admired place in the world. He would have brought great shame to his family crest if he had had only three servants. Having only two would have killed him.             

 Monseigneur had been out to dinner the night before, where the Comedy and the Grand Opera had been performed. Monseigneur went out to dinner most nights, and there were always interesting people around. He was so polite and easily swayed that the Comedy and the Grand Opera influenced his opinion on matters of government and state secrets far more than the countryís needs did. This wasnít good for France, as itís never good for a country to be ruled by frivolous leaders, like when the merry   Stuart King Charles II  Stuart  ruled England.             

 The monseigneur had one truly noble idea about public business in general: to let everything continue on its own. For specific kinds of public business he had another respectable idea: that it should benefit him personally and give him more power or money. He believed that the world had been created to bring him pleasure. The text of his class, which had only been changed by one pronoun, read, ìThe earth and its fullness are mine, says the monseigneur.î             

 However, the monseigneur had slowly discovered that things were not going well in his private and public financial affairs, so he had become close with the tax collector. The monseigneur relied on the tax collector for public financial matters because he didnít understand them and had to rely on someone who could. He relied on him for private finance, because tax collectors were rich, and after many years of living in luxury the monseigneur was running out of money. He had pulled his sister out of a convent before she had become a nun (where she would have worn a veilóthe cheapest garment she could wear). Instead, he made her marry a very rich tax collector whose family was of a lower class. This tax collector, who was appropriately carrying a cane with a golden apple on top, was one of the people in the other room. Most people groveled before the tax collector. All except people of a higher class like the monseigneur, and even his own wife, who looked down on him with contempt.              

 The tax collector was an extravagant man. He had thirty horses in his stables, twenty-four manservants in his house, and six maids served his wife. Though his in-laws looked down on him, the tax collector was the most honest of the people at the monseigneurís hotel that day as he didnít hide the fact that all he did was steal and take what he could.              

 Although the rooms were beautiful to look at and decorated with the latest styles, the hotel was not doing good business. The hotel was of especially poor taste if you considered the poor citizens in their rags and nightcaps nearby. In fact, the slums and the hotel were the same distance from Notre Dame, and its towers could be seen from both locations. But no one at the monseigneurís worried about this. There were military officers there who knew nothing about the military, and naval officers who knew nothing about ships. There were politicians who had no knowledge of current affairs and church officials who lived sinful lives. All of them were completely unfit for their positions, and all of them were lying and pretending to be something they were not. But all of them were of the same class, or nearly the same class, as the monseigneur, and therefore they were given any public jobs that could benefit them. There were many of these people. People who werenít immediately connected with the monseigneur or the state, but who were also completely disconnected from reality and any honest, hard work, were also everywhere. Doctors who made great fortunes by supplying imaginary cures for diseases that didnít actually exist smiled at their patients in the monseigneurís front rooms. Theorists who claimed to have solved all the countryís problems but didnít actually do anything about them rambled on to anyone who would listen. Heretic philosophers who theorized meaninglessly about the world to build themselves up talked with heretic chemists who wanted to change metals into gold. All met at this gathering of the monseigneurís.             

 Elegant, well-bred gentlemen, who, then just as now, have been known by their lack of interest in any interesting subject, were in a fine state of exhaustion at the monseigneurís. The spies in the upper-class world of Paris would have had trouble finding one wife in the homes of these men who would admit that she was a mother. Indeed, except for the act of giving birth, which doesnít give someone the right to be called a mother, babies were out of fashion. Peasant women took care of the babies and brought them up, while sixty-year-old grandmothers acted like twenty-year-olds.              

 Everyone there was completely detached from reality. In the outermost room there were six or so people who had, for a few years, some vague feeling that things in general were getting worse. To fix this, three of them had become members of a cult of   Convulsionists a religious sect whose members went into convulsions under divine inspiration  Convulsionists . They were trying to decide right then if they should foam at the mouth, start screaming, or go catatonic to show the monseigneur signs of what would happen in the future. The other three had joined a different cult that focused on talk of the ìcenter of truth.î They believed that mankind had abandoned the ìcenter of truthîówhich was very apparentóbut that it was still in the ìcircumference.î The way to keep us from leaving the circumference, and to push us back into the center, was by fasting and seeing ghosts. So these people spent a lot of time talking with ghosts, claiming it did a lot of good, but no one ever saw a tangible difference.              

 The comforting part was that everyone at the monseigneurís hotel was perfectly dressed. If the day of Judgment was a day on which oneís clothing were judged, everyone would have been fine for eternity. People frizzled and powdered and stuck their hair up. Their delicate skin was preserved and covered in makeup. The men wore attractive swords, and everyone smelled good. All of this would surely keep anything going forever. The elegant gentlemen of the best breeding wore little decorations that clinked as they strolled around. These golden chains rang like precious little bells. That ringing, and the rustle of silk and expensive cloth, caused a flutter in the air that stirred up the hunger of the poor in Saint Antoine far away.              

 Clothing was the one unfailing charm that kept all things in place. Everyone was dressed for a fancy ball that would never stop, from the people at the palace of the Tuileries, to monseigneur and all of the court, to the judgesí chambers and all of society. All, that is, except for the poor. Even the executioner was dressed for the ball. He, according to the style, performed his job dressed up, wearing makeup and a gold-laced coat, high heels, and white silk stockings. At the gallows and the   wheel an execution method in which the prisonerís limbs were broken  wheel óthe axe was rarely usedóthe executioner wore fancy clothes. He was known as Mr. Paris by Mr. Orleans and his other fellow executioners. And who, at the monseigneurís party in 1780, could possibly doubt that a system based around a made-up, gold-laced, high-heeled, silk-stocking-wearing hangman wouldnít outlast the stars themselves!             

 Monseigneur had taken his chocolate from his four servants and eaten it, and he opened the doors of his inner chamber and came out. When he did, everyone started bowing, scraping, fawning, and generally humiliating themselves before him. Everyone did so much bowing and praying for the monseigneur that nothing was left for Heaven, which might have been one of several reason why the monseigneurís worshippers never went there.              

 As the monseigneur walked to the distant outer rooms, reaching the far region of the Circumference of Truth, he talked and smiled to his worshippers, promising something to one person or waving to another. Then he turned, came back, and eventually went back into his room with his servants. He wasnít seen again.             

 After the monseigneurís show was over, the flutter of people and the ringing of their precious little bells faded and went downstairs. Soon there was only one person left in the crowd. He had his hat under his arm and his snuffbox in his hand, and he slowly walked past the mirrors on the wall on the way out.          

 He stopped at the last door on his way and turned toward the monseigneurís chamber. ìI send you to the devil!î he said.             

 With that he shook the snuff off his fingers as if he had shaken dust off his feet and walked quietly downstairs.              

 He was about sixty years old. He was well dressed and proud looking, and his face was like an elegant maskópale and almost transparent, with every feature in it clearly defined, and only one set expression on it. His nose was slightly pinched at the top of each nostril, although it was well formed otherwise. The only change in expression that ever happened in his face occurred in these two little dents. They changed color sometimes, and sometimes they would contract and expand in a slight pulsing. When this happened they made his whole being look cruel and treacherous. His mouth and his eyes were much too thin and flat and added to his treacherous look. But still, it was a handsome and remarkable face.              

 The man went downstairs into the courtyard, got into his carriage, and drove away. Not many people had talked to him at the party. He had kept a little apart from the rest, and the monseigneur hadnít been particularly friendly to him. As a result, he seemed to enjoy seeing the common people running out of the way of his horses, often barely avoiding being run down. His driver drove as if he were charging at an enemy, and this recklessness didnít change the masterís facial expression at all. Complaints had sometimes been heardóeven in Paris back then, when no one usually cared about such thingsóthat the upper-class custom of driving hard in the narrow streets without sidewalks endangered and maimed the poor in a barbarous manner. But few people cared enough to think twice about it, and as in every other matter, the poor were left to get out of trouble on their own.             

 With a loud rattle and clatter, the carriage rushed through the streets and around corners, disregarding the safety of others in a way thatís difficult to understand now. Women screamed, and men grabbed each other and pulled children out of the way. Finally, as the carriage swooped around a street corner by a fountain, one of its wheels gave a sickening little bump. Several people cried out, and the horses reared up and halted.              

 If the horses hadnít stopped, the carriage probably would have kept going. Carriages often drove on and left behind whomever they had hurt. And why not? But the frightened driver had gotten down quickly off the top of the coach, and ten people held the horsesí bridles.              

 ìWhatís wrong?î said the man inside. He calmly looked out of the carriage.          

 A tall man wearing a nightcap had picked up a bundle from under the horsesí feet and laid it on the base of the fountain. He was kneeling down in the wet mud, howling and crying like a wild animal.             

 ìExcuse me, monsieur the marquis!î said a meek man in ragged clothing. ìIt is a child.î             

 ìWhy is he howling like that? Is it his child?î             

 ìExcuse me, monsieur the marquis. Itís a shame, but yes, it is.î             

 The fountain was a little set off from the street, for the street opened into a space of about ten or twelve square yards. The tall man suddenly got up from the ground and ran toward the carriage. Monsieur the marquis reached for the handle of his sword.              

 ìHeís been killed!î screamed the man, extending both arms over his head desperately. ìHeís dead!î             

 The crowd gathered around and looked at monsieur the marquis. They only looked at him carefully and eagerly, without any menace or anger. No one said anything. After the first cry they had all stayed completely silent. The voice of the meek man was flat and tame with submission. The marquis looked at them all as if they were rats that had just come out of their holes.              

 The marquis took out his purse.              

 ìIím amazed that you people canít take care of yourselves and your children. One or another of you is always getting in the way. Who knows how badly youíve hurt my horses? Here! Give him that.î             

 He tossed a gold coin on the ground for the driver to pick up, and everyone leaned forward to watch it as it fell. The tall man cried out again desperately, ìHeís dead!î             

 Another man, for whom everyone else made way, arrived quickly and stopped him. On seeing this late comer, the meek man fell onto his shoulder, sobbing and crying and pointing to the fountain where some women were bent over the motionless bundle. They moved around it gently, completely silent, as were the men.              

 ìI know, I know,î said the man who had just arrived. ìBe brave, Gaspard! It is better for the poor child to die this way than to live. It has died in an instant without suffering. Could it have lived one hour as happily?î             

 ìYou are a philosopher,î said the marquis, smiling. ìWhat is your name?î             

 ìMy name is Defarge.î             

 ìWhat is your job?î             

 ìI sell wine, monsieur the marquis.î             

 ìPick that up, you philosopher and seller of wine,î said the marquis, throwing down another gold coin. ìSpend it however you like. Are the horses all right?î             

 Without bothering to look at the crowd again, monsieur the marquis leaned back in his chair. As the carriage drove away the marquis had the look of a gentleman who has accidentally broken some small trifle and paid for it easily. His ease was disturbed when a coin flew into the carriage and landed on the floor.             

 ìStop!î said monsieur the marquis. ìStop the horses! Who threw that?î             

 He looked to where Defarge the wine seller had been standing a moment before. But instead he saw the poor father facedown on the pavement, crying there. The only person who stood beside him was a large, dark woman who was knitting.          

 ìYou dogs!î said the marquis smoothly, his face unchanged except for the corners of his nose. ìI would happily run any of you over and eliminate you like you were insects or vermin. If I knew which one of you rascals threw that coin into the carriage, and if that person was nearby, I would crush him under the wheels.î              

 The people were so used to being subservient, and had so much bad experience that they knew what a man like the marquis could do to them, legally or otherwise, that no one said or did anything. None of the men even raised an eye. Only the woman who stood there knitting looked up steadily, and looked the marquis in the face. He was too dignified to even notice. His hate-filled eyes passed over her, and over the whole crowd of vermin. He leaned back in his seat again and yelled to the driver, ìGo on!î             

 The carriage drove on, and other carriages came speeding by after it. Ministers, state projectors, tax collectors, doctors, lawyers, churchmen, people from the Grand Opera and the Comedyóall the people who had been at the monseigneurís dinnerócame whirling by. The poorer people came creeping out of their homes to look at the accident. They stayed there for hours. Soldiers and policemen came between the people and the accident and formed a barrier that they slunk behind and peeped through. The father had picked up his dead child and gone off with it long ago. The women who had cared for the child while it was lying at the base of the fountain sat there watching the water flowing in the fountain and the rich people drive by. All this time the one woman who was knitting stayed there, knitting as steadily as   fate In Greek myth, one of the Fates spun a thread that represented each personís destiny  fate . Soon everything was back to normal: The water ran in the fountain. The swift river ran. The day ran into evening. The life in the streets ran on quietly as it always does. The poor went back to sleeping in their cramped little homes. The rich people went to their fancy dinners, and all things ran their course.              

 The landscape was beautiful. The corn had a bright color, though there wasnít very much of it. Little patches of rye grew where corn should have been. Little patches of small peas and beans also grew there, and so did little patches of most of the cheap vegetables that can be used as substitutes for wheat. The plants, like the men and women who grew them, looked like they were growing unwillingly, like they wanted to give up and die.              

 Monsieur the marquis rode in his traveling carriage, which was loaded with unnecessary things. The carriage was conducted by four horses and two guards on horseback, all struggling up a steep hill. The marquisís face was blushing red, but not because he wasnít of good breeding. The redness didnít come from within but from an external source beyond his control: the sunset.              

 The light from the sunset shone so strongly into the traveling carriage when it reached the top of the hill that the marquis was covered in a crimson light. ìThe light will die out soon,î said the marquis as he glanced at his hands.          

 The sun was so low that it set right at that moment. When they adjusted the brakes of the wheel, the carriage slid downhill. With the smell of fire, the red glow disappeared in a cloud of dust. The sun went down as the marquis went down the hill, and there was no glow left when they took the brake off the wheel.             

 But the impoverished countryside was still there. A little village sat at the bottom of the hill. There was a church tower, a windmill, a forest for hunting, and a cliff with a castle on it that was used as a prison. All of these were growing darker as night came on. The marquis looked around at all these objects like someone who was returning home.              

 The village had one poor street with its one poor brewery, a poor tannery, a poor tavern, a poor stable yard for exchanging horses that delivered the mail, a poor fountain, and all the usual poor parts of a village. There were poor people there too. Everyone who lived in the village was poor, and many of them were sitting in their doorways shredding a few onions and other bits of food for supper. Many were at the fountain washing off leaves, grass, and anything from the ground that was edible. Small signs of their poverty were everywhere. They were taxed by the state, by the church, and by the lord. They paid both the local tax collector and the general tax collector, according to tradition. It was amazing there was any village left at all.              

 There werenít many children, and there were no dogs around. The men and women living there had two choices in life: they could live lives of the lowest quality down in the little village, or they could be locked up and die in the prison on the cliff.              

 The marquisís arrival was announced by a messenger who had come ahead of him and by the sound of the horseman cracking his whip, which wrapped around the horsesí heads like a snake in the night air. The marquisís traveling carriage pulled up in front of the posting-house gate. It was near the fountain, and the peasants stopped what they were doing to look at him. He looked back at them, and, although he didnít notice it, the peasants were all slowly and surely wasting away, this wasting being the reason that people in England would think of Frenchmen as small and thin for the next hundred years or so.              

 The marquis glanced over the faces of the peasants, and they bowed their heads before him the same way he had bowed his head in front of the monseigneur. The only difference was that these people were bowing because they were suffering, not because they wanted to appease him. Just then a gray old repairer of roads joined the crowd.              

 ìBring that man over to me!î said the marquis to the messenger.              

 The man was brought to him. He had taken off his hat and held it in his hand, and the other men crowded around him to look and listen the way the people had at the fountain in Paris.              

 ìDid I pass you on the road?î             

 ìYes, Monseigneur. I had the honor of seeing you on the road.î             

 ìI saw you coming up the hill. And at the top of the hill?î             

 ìItís true, Monseigneur.î             

 ìWhat were you looking at so intently?î             

 ìMonseigneur, I was looking at the man.î             

 He bent down a little, and with his tattered blue cap he pointed under the carriage. Everyone around him bent over to look under the carriage.              

 ìWhat man, you pig? Why were you looking there?î             

 ìExcuse me, Monseigneur, he was hanging onto the chain of the brake.î             

 ìWho?î asked the monseigneur.              

 ìThe man, Monseigneur.î             

 ìCurse these idiots! What was the manís name? You know all the men in this part of the country. Who was he?î             

 ìHave mercy on me, Monseigneur! He was not from this part of the country. Iíd never seen him before in my life.î             

 ìHe was hanging onto the chain? Was he trying to suffocate himself?î             

 ìThat was what was amazing about it, Monseigneur. If youíll permit me. His head was hanging overólike this!î             

 He turned himself sideways to the carriage and leaned back. He faced up and his head was hanging down. Then he got back up, fumbled with his cap, and bowed.          

 ìWhat was the man like?î             

 ìHe was whiter than a miller, Monseigneur. He was covered in dust and white as a ghost. Tall as a ghost too!î             

 The description produced an immense reaction in the crowd, but everyone kept looking at the marquis. They might have been looking to see if he had any ghosts on his conscience.              

 ìReally, you did well to see a thief traveling under my carriage and not say anything,î said the marquis sarcastically, aware that he shouldnít let poor people bother him. ìBah! Hold him, Monsieur Gabelle!î             

 Monsieur Gabelle was the postmaster and also a tax official. He had eagerly come out to help with the interrogation. He held the man being examined by his sleeve officially.              

 ìBah! Go aside!î said Monsieur Gabelle.              

 ìArrest this stranger if he tries to stay in your village tonight. And make sure that his business is honest, Gabelle.î             

 ìI am happy to be of service, Monseigneur.î             

 ìDid he run away, fellow? Where did that accursed man go?î             

 The ìaccursed manî was already under the carriage with six or so of his friends, pointing out the chain with his blue cap. Some six or so other people quickly pulled him out from under the carriage and brought him to the marquis. He was out of breath.              

 ìDid the man run away, you dolt, when we stopped to apply the brake?î             

 ìMonseigneur, he jumped over the side of the hill, headfirst, the way a person jumps into a river.î             

 ìLook into it, Gabelle.î Then he yelled to the driver, ìLetís go!î             

 The six or so people who had been looking at the chain were still near the wheels. The wheels turned so quickly that they were lucky to get out of the way and to save their skin and bones. They were all very skinny, and there wasnít much else left of them, otherwise they might not have been so lucky.              

 The carriage burst out of the village and headed toward a rise in the road. The hill was steep, though, and soon the carriage had slowed down to a walking pace. It swung and lumbered up the hill among the sweet scents of the summer night. The horsemen were surrounded by thousands of tiny gnats, and they lashed the horses with their whips. The valet walked beside the horses. The courier could be heard as he trotted ahead into the distance.              

 At the steepest part of the hill there was a little graveyard with a cross and a large figure of Jesus Christ on it. It was a rough wooden figure done by some amateur country sculptor. He must have based the figure on a person he knew, or perhaps on himself, for it was terribly small and thin.              

 A woman was kneeling at the foot of this figure. She turned her head as the carriage came near her and quickly got up and went to stand at the carriage door.              

 ìItís you, Monseigneur! I have a petition for you.î             

 He exclaimed impatiently but looked out at her. His expression didnít change.          

 ìWhat? What is it? Always petitions!î             

 ìMonseigneur, for the love of God! My husband the foresterÖî             

 ìWhat about your husband the forester? Itís always the same with you people. He canít afford to pay for something?î             

 ìHe has paid all that he has, Monseigneur. He is dead.î             

 ìGood! Heís quiet. Can I bring him back to life for you?î             

 ìSadly, no, Monseigneur. But he is buried over there under a sad little heap of grass.î             

 ìSo?î             

 ìMonseigneur, there are so many sad little heaps of grassÖî             

 ìAgain, so?î             

 She looked like an old woman, but she was in fact young. She wrung her vein-covered, rough hands together with wild energy and placed one of them on the door of the carriage. She did it tenderly as if placing her hand on someoneís chest, as if the carriage could feel her touch.              

 ìListen to me, Monseigneur. Listen to my petition! My husband died of hunger. So many people do. So many more people will die from hunger.î             

 ìAgain, so? Can I feed them all?î             

 ìGod knows that Iím not asking for that, Monseigneur. My petition is that a small bit of stone or wood with my husbandís name be used to mark his grave. Otherwise his burial place will soon be forgotten. No one will find it after I die of hunger too. I will be buried under a different sad little heap of grass, Monseigneur. There are so many unmarked graves. People are dying faster and faster. There is so much hunger, Monseigneur. Monseigneur!î             

 The valet moved her away from the door, and the carriage drove away quickly. The horsemen sped up, and she was left far behind. The monseigneur, accompanied by his entourage, was quickly covering the league or two of distance between him and his country house.              

 The summer air was sweet all around him, and the same air surrounded the dusty, ragged, worn-out group of peasants at the fountain close by. The repairer of roads with the blue cap was still telling the story of the man under the carriage. As the crowd grew tired of the story, they walked away one by one. Lights started to shine in the little windows of the village, and the lights in the windows went out and more stars appeared. It looked as if the lights in the windows hadnít been put out but had shot up into the sky.              

 By then the marquis was at his large, high-roofed house, which was surrounded by trees. A torch was lit, and his carriage stopped and a large door of his chateau was opened for him.              

 ìI am expecting Monsieur Charles. Has he arrived from England yet?î the marquis asked one of his servants.             

 ìNot yet, Monseigneur,î the servant replied.              

 The marquisís chateau was a massive, solid building. It had a large stone courtyard in front of it, and two stone staircases on either side led up to a stone terrace in front of the main door. The whole thing was made of stone. It had heavy stone railings and large stone flowerpots with stone flowers in them. There were menís faces and lionís heads carved out of stone decorating the building everywhere. It was as if a   Gorgon a woman in Greek mythology with snakes for hair who turned people who looked at her into stone  Gorgon   had looked at the chateau when it had been built two hundred years ago and turned it all to stone.              

 The marquis got out of his carriage and went up the wide flight of short steps, and servants with torches went before him. The light cut through the darkness, causing an owl to hoot in the roof of a large stable that was off through the trees. Otherwise it was so quiet that the torches the servants carried on the steps and held at the front door sounded as if they were burning in a small stateroom instead of in the open night air. There was no other sound besides the hooting of the owl and the sound of water in a fountain falling into its stone basin. It was as if the night were holding its breath, sighing a long, low breath, and then holding its breath again.              

 The marquis walked through the front door, which clanged shut behind him. He walked across a dark hall decorated with old boar spears, swords, and hunting knives. There were also some riding rods and whips, which many of the peasants, all of whom were now dead, had been beaten with when the lord of the house was angry.              

 The marquis avoided the larger rooms, which were dark and had been locked for the night. With his torchbearer going in front of him, he went up a staircase to a door in a hallway. The door led him to his own private three-room apartment, consisting of a bedroom and two other rooms. The rooms had high, vaulted ceilings and cold, bare floors. There were large dogs on the hearth where they would burn wood in the fireplace during the winter. The rooms had all the luxuries befitting a marquis at this luxurious time and place in history. The style of one of the last kings, Louis XIV of Franceópart of a line of kings that thought for sure they would rule foreverówas known for its elegant furniture. But there were also many objects that referred to different periods in the history of France.              

 In the third room the servants set the dinner table for two. The room was round and was in one of the houseís four towers, the tops of which looked like candle extinguishers. It was a small room, high up in the chateau. The window was wide open and the wooden shutters were closed. The darkness shone through the slats of the shutters and made dark horizontal lines on the stone floor.          

 The marquis looked at the table settings. ìIs that for my nephew? The servants said he hadnít arrived yet.î             

 He had not arrived, but he was expected.              

 ìAh! He probably wonít arrive tonight. But leave the table as it is anyway. I will be ready for dinner in fifteen minutes.î             

 The monseigneur was ready for dinner in fifteen minutes, and he sat down alone to his extravagant dinner. His chair was on the opposite side from the window, and he was eating his soup. He was about to take a sip from a glass of Bordeaux wine when he suddenly put it down.              

 ìWhat is that?î he asked calmly, looking at the horizontal lines of black on the stone floor.              

 ìWhat, Monseigneur? That?î             

 ìOutside the blinds. Open the blinds.î             

 The servant opened the blinds.              

 ìWell?î             

 ìItís nothing, Monseigneur. Thereís nothing outside but the trees and the darkness.î             

 The servant who had spoken had opened the blinds wide and had looked out into the empty night. He stood at the window with the darkness behind him, looking to the marquis for further instructions.              

 ìGood,î said the marquis calmly. ìClose the blinds again.î             

 The servant closed the blinds and the marquis went back to eating his supper. He had finished half of it when he stopped eating again with his glass of wine in his hands. He had heard the sound of wheels, and the sound grew closer and quickly came up to the front of the house.              

 ìFind out who has arrived.î             

 It was the monseigneurís nephew. He had been a few   leagues a league is about three miles  leagues  behind the monseigneur early in the afternoon. He had been catching up to him quickly, but not quickly enough to arrive with him at the house. At the posting house he had been told that the monseigneur was ahead of him.              

 The servants told the nephew that supper was waiting for him and that the monseigneur wanted him to join him. He came to supper shortly after he arrived. In England, the monseigneurís nephew was known as Charles Darnay.              

 The monseigneur was polite when he arrived, but they did not shake hands.          

 ìYou left Paris yesterday, sir?î he asked the monseigneur as he sat down at the table.              

 ìYes, yesterday. And you?î             

 ìI came here directly.î             

 ìFrom London?î             

 ìYes.î             

 ìIt took you a long time to get here,î said the marquis, smiling.             

 ìNo. I came directly.î             

 ìExcuse me! I didnít mean a long time in your journey. I meant a long time intending to come here.î             

 ìI have been delayed byóî the nephew paused ìóvarious business.î             

 ìWithout a doubt,î said the marquis calmly.             

 While the servants were there, the two men did not speak. After coffee had been served and they were alone, the nephew looked at his uncle. He looked in his eyesóhis uncleís face was like a fine maskóand started up a conversation.          

 ìAs you guess, I have come back, sir, looking for the object that took me away in the first place. It put me in great and unexpected danger. But it is a sacred object, and even if it had led to my death, I hope it would have protected me.î          

 ìDonít say ëto death,íî said the uncle. ìItís not necessary to say ëto death.íî             

 ìI doubt, sir, that if it had carried me to the very brink of death, you would have stopped me there,î answered the nephew.              

 The expression on the marquisís face, and the dents in his nose, ominously suggested that was true. The uncle made a graceful gesture of protest, but it was so apparent that he was only being polite that it wasnít very reassuring.          

 ìIndeed, sir, as far as I know, you may have arranged to make my already suspicious circumstances look even more suspicious.î             

 ìNo, no, no,î said the uncle, pleasantly.              

 ìBut whether thatís true or not,î continued the nephew, looking at him suspiciously, ìI know that you would stop me any way you could, and use any means necessary.î              

 ìMy friend, I told you that myself,î said the uncle. The two dents in his nose pulsed quietly. ìDo me the favor of remembering that I told you that a long time ago.î             

 ìI remember that.î             

 ìThank you,î said the marquis, very sweetly.             

 The tone of his voice stayed in the air like the tone of a musical instrument.             

 ìIn effect, sir,î continued the nephew. ìI believe that it is both your bad luck and my good luck that I am not in a prison in France right now.î             

 ìI donít quite understand,î answered the uncle, sipping his coffee. ìCan you explain?î             

 I believe that if you werenít out of favor with the court, and had not been for years, that a   letter de cachet official documents that could be used to send someone to prison  letter de cachet  would have put me in prison indefinitely.î              

 ìIt is possible that, for the sake of our familyís honor, I might even decide to inconvenience you to that extent,î said the uncle calmly. ìPlease excuse me!î             

 ìI see that, luckily for me, you were received coldly two days ago at the monseigneurís reception, as usual,î said the nephew.              

 ìI wouldnít say luckily, my friend,î answered the uncle politely. ìI would not be so sure of that. Some time alone in a prison cell to think things over might have a better influence on your future than you have on it yourself. But it is useless to talk about this. I am, as you have said, at a disadvantage. These little things we doósending people to prison, helping the power and honor of familiesóthese slight advantages that might inconvenience you are only to be gotten by being insistent. So many people want them, and so few get them! It didnít used to be like this, but France has changed for the worse in such ways. Our ancestors, not long ago, held the right of life or death over the peasants and the poor. Many such dogs have been dragged out of this very room and hanged. In my bedroom next door, one man, as far as we know, was stabbed with a   poniard a small dagger  poniard  for saying disrespectful things about his daughter. His own daughter! We have lost many of our privileges. There is a new way of thinking today. And the power of our position, these days, mightóI wonít say that it definitely would, but it mightócause us real inconvenience. All of this is very bad for us!î             

 The marquis inhaled a pinch of   snuff powdered tobacco that is sniffed up the nostrils  snuff  and shook his head. He was as elegantly unhappy as he could be with a country where he and his family still lived.              

 ìWe have used the power of our familyís position, both in the old days and today, to such a degree,î said Darnay unhappily, ì that I think our name is more hated that any name in France.î             

 ìLetís hope so,î said the uncle. ìHatred of the upper classes is the involuntary respect of the low classes.î             

 ìThere isnít a person anywhere in this country who looks at me with respect. They look at me with the fear and submission of slavery.î             

 ìThat is a compliment to the magnificence of our family, earned by living a magnificent lifestyle. Hah!î The marquis laughed and inhaled another pinch of snuff. He crossed his legs daintily.             

 The nephew leaned his elbow on the table and covered his face with his hands. The marquis glared at him sideways with a look of sharpness, familiarity, and dislike. The expression didnít match the attitude of indifference he pretended to have.             

 ìThe only philosophy left is oppression! The dark respect of fear and slavery, my friend, will keep the peasants in line as long as this roof blocks out the sky,î he said, looking up at the ceiling.              

 That might not be as long as the marquis thought. If someone had shown him a picture of his chateau a few years later, and a picture of fifty others like it, he might not have been able to tell his house from the other burned, destroyed wrecks. As far as the roof, he might have discovered it blocking out the sky in a new awayóshutting it out from the sight of the people who were shot by the bullets of a hundred thousand muskets.              

 ìMeanwhile,î said the marquis, ìI will preserve the honor and faith of our family, if you wonít. But you must be tired. Should we end our meeting for the night?î             

 ìOne more minute.î             

 ìWe can continue for another hour if you want.î             

 ìSir,î said the nephew, ìwe have done wrong, and we are reaping the benefits of these wrongdoings.î             

 ìWe have done wrong?î the marquis repeated with a questioning smile, delicately pointing at his nephew and then to himself.             

 ìOur family. Our honorable family, whose reputation is so very important to both of us, but in such different ways. Even during my fatherís generation, our family did many wrongs. We hurt every person who came between us and our pleasure, whatever it was. Why am I talking about my fatherís time when it is also your time? You are my fatherís twin brother. You inherited as much as he did and succeeded as head of this family after he died. How can I separate you from him?î             

 ìDeath has separated us!î said the marquis.              

 ìAnd death has left me tied to a system that is dreadful to me. I am responsible for it but am also powerless in it. I am trying to following through on my motherís dying request and the look her in eyes, which begged me to have mercy and to make up for past wrongs. I am also tortured by looking for help and power and finding none.î              

 ìIf you are looking for help from me, nephew, you will never find it,î said the marquis. He touched Darnayís chest with his finger. They were now standing by the fireplace.              

 Every fine straight line in the clear whiteness of his face was mean and tight. He stood there, looking quietly at his nephew, with his snuffbox in his hand. He touched his nephewís chest with his finger again, as though his finger were the tip of a small sword that he delicately ran through his nephewís chest. He said,             

 ìMy friend, I will die preserving the system under which I have lived.î             

 When he said it, he inhaled a pinch of snuff and put the snuffbox in his pocket.              

 ìBetter to be a rational creature,î he added after ringing a small bell on the table, ì and accept your natural destiny. But I can see that you are lost, Monsieur Charles.î             

 ìOur familyís property and all of this country are lost to me,î said the nephew, sadly. ìI am giving them up.î             

 ìAre they both yours to give up? France may be, but is our familyís property? Itís hardly worth mentioning because it is so little, but is it yours yet?î             

 ìI have no plan to claim it yet. If I inherited it from you tomorrowóî             

 ìWhich I hope, for my sake, is not likely,î the marquis said.              

 ìóOr twenty years from nowóî             

 ìYouíre too kind,î said the marquis. ìStill, I prefer the possibility that I may live that long.î              

 ìóI would give it up and go live a different kind of life somewhere else. It isnít much to give up. It only brings me misery.î             

 ìHah!î said the marquis, looking around his finely decorated room.              

 ìThe room is nice-looking enough. But to see it for what it really is, under the sky by daylight, it is a crumbling tower of wastefulness. It is poorly managed, and we are in debt. We have built our fortune on the oppression, starvation, and mistreatment of others.î              

 ìHah!î said the marquis again, in a well-satisfied manner.              

 ìIf I ever inherit it, it will be given to someone who is more qualified to put it back into good condition. This way, the poor peasants who are tied to this land and who have been abused for so long may, in another generation, suffer less. But I donít want it. There is a curse on this house and all of this land.î             

 ìWhat about you?î asked the uncle. ìForgive my curiosity, but with your new ideas, how do you plan on making a living?î             

 ìI will do what other people here in France do, and what the nobility may someday have to do. I will work.î             

 ìIn England, perhaps?î             

 ìYes. I will not tarnish the family name there. The family name canít harm me elsewhere, since I do not use it in other countries.î             

 When the marquis had rung the bell, his valet lit the bedroom next door. Bright light now shone from it through the doorway. The marquis looked that way and listened until he had heard his valet walk away.              

 ìYou like England a lot. You have done well for yourself there,î he said, smiling calmly at his nephew.              

 ìI have told you already that I may be indebted to you, sir, for my success there. Otherwise, it has been a safe haven for me.î              

 ìThose bragging English say that it is a safe haven for many people. Do you know another Frenchman who has also found safety there? A doctor?î              

 ìYes.î             

 ìWith a daughter?î             

 ìYes.î             

 ìYes,î said the marquis. ìYou are tired. Good night!î             

 As the marquis smiled and bowed, there was something suspicious in his face, and there was something mysterious about his last words. The nephew noticed this, and it bothered him. At the same time, the thin lines around the marquisís eyes, lips, and nose made his expression look handsome and evil.              

 ìYes,î repeated the marquis. ìA doctor with a daughter. Yes. So begins the new way of thinking. You are tired. Good night!î             

 It would have been as useful to question the stone faces outside the chateau as it was to question the marquisís face. The nephew looked at him as he passed him on his way out the door, but he couldnít tell what he was thinking.              

 ìGood night!î said the uncle. ìI look forward to seeing you again in the morning. Sleep well!î He called to the servants: ìBring a torch and show my nephew to his room!î Then he muttered to himself, ìAnd burn him to death in his bed, if you will.î He rang the little bell again and called his valet to his own bedroom.              

 After the valet had come and gone, the marquis paced back and forth in his loose robe to prepare himself for sleep on that hot, still night. He was wearing soft slippers on his feet and he moved around the room like an elegant tiger, making no noise at all. He looked like some magical marquis in a story who could change into a tiger, and was either just about to become a tiger or change back from a tiger into a man.             

 He walked from one end of his elegant bedroom to the other, thinking about what had happened to him that day. He thought of the carriage slowly climbing up the hill at sunset. He thought of the sun setting and the carriage traveling down the hill, of the mill, the prison on the rock, the little village in the valley, the peasants at the fountain, and the repairer of roads with his blue hat pointing out the chain under the carriage. The fountain reminded him of the fountain in Paris, and he though of the bundled-up child lying on the step, the women bending over it, and the tall man waving his arms in the air and yelling, ìDead!î             

 ìI am cooler now and am ready to go to bed, ì said the marquis.             

 He left only one candle burning on the hearth, and he pulled the thin gauze curtains around the bed. He heard the sound of the wind outside in the night as he settled down to sleep.              

 The stone faces on the chateauís outer walls looked out at the night. It was quiet and dark for three long hours. For three long hours, the horses rattled in their stables, the dogs barked, and the owl made a noise that sounded very different from the sound poets say they make. But animals are often stubborn and donít often say the lines written for them.              

 For three hours, the stone faces of men and lions on the chateau stared out at the night. All of the land was dark, and the dust settled on the quiet roads. It was so dark that the little heaps of poor grass in the graveyard were indistinguishable from one another, and the figure on the crucifix might have come down, since it was practically invisible in the darkness. In the village, the tax collectors and the people who paid the taxes were fast asleep. They may have been dreaming of large feasts, as starving people usually do, or of resting and living easily, as overworked slaves and oxen do. The thin villagers slept soundly and, in their dreams, were fed well and were free.              

 The fountain in the village flowed silently and invisibly in the darkness, as did the fountain at the chateau. They melted away like minutes of time during the three hours of darkness. Then, it started to turn to daylight.              

 It got lighter and lighter until sunlight hit the tops of the trees and light spread over the hill. In the sunlight, the water in the chateau fountain looked red as if the water were blood, and the faces of the stone statues were also red. The birds sang loudly, and one little bird sitting on the windowsill of the marquisís bedroom sang with all its might. The closest stone face nearest seemed to stare at the bird. Its mouth was open wide, making it appear amazed and awe stricken.              

 Finally the sun was up and people began to stir in the village. Windows were opened, doors were unlocked, and people came outside shivering, chilled by the sweet morning air. Then they began the hard work that would continue for all of them throughout the day. Some went to the fountain, and some went to work in the fields. Men and women went to dig and search for food. They went to tend to the meager livestock and to lead the skinny cows to any meager pastures they could find near the roadside. A couple of people were at the church kneeling and praying at the cross. A cow they had led there tried to eat the weeds at its feet.             

 The people at the marquisís chateau woke up later than the villagers, as was their habit, but they did gradually awake. First, the boar spears and hunting knives hanging in the hallway gleamed red in the sunlight. Then doors and windows were opened. The horses in their stables turned around to see light and fresh air coming in through the doorways. The iron-grated windows were opened, revealing the leaves outside rustling and sparkling. Dogs pulled at their chains impatiently, impatient to be let loose.              

 All of these small events were part of the morning routine. But some other things were happening that morning were not that common. At the chateau, the large bell was ringing. People were running up and down the stairs and hurrying around on the terrace. People ran everywhere. Others saddled horses quickly and rode away.              

 What winds told the repairer of roads about this frenzy? He was already working on the hilltop past the village, with his small lunch lying in a small bundle on a pile of stones. Had the birds, carrying some grains while they flew, dropped the news to him the way they sowed seeds in the ground? No matter how he knew, that morning the repairer of roads ran as if his life depended on it. He ran down the hill with dust covering his legs to his knees, and didnít stop until he got to the fountain.              

 Everyone from the village was at the fountain. They stood around in their depressed way and whispered quietly, showing no other emotions than morbid curiosity and surprise. The cows that were being led had been brought in and tied to anything that could hold them. They stood there looking on stupidly, or lying down and chewing cud that they had picked up while walking. Some of the people of the chateau, and some from the posting house, and all the tax collectors, carried weapons. They were gathered on the other side of the street not knowing what to do. The repairer of roads had already pushed into a group of fifty friends and was hitting himself on the chest with his blue cap. What did all this mean? What did it mean that they had lifted Monsieur Gabelle behind a servant on horseback and were carrying him away on the galloping horse, like a new version of the German ballad of Leonora?             

 It meant that there was one stone face too many up at the chateau. Someone was dead.              

 The Gorgon had looked at the building again that night and had turned one more face to stone. The building had been waiting for this particular stone face for two hundred years.              

 The stone face was that of the marquis on his pillow. It looked like an elegant mask that had been suddenly frightened, made angry, and had then frozen that way. A knife had been plunged into his heart. There was a piece of paper tied to the handle. On it was written:             

 ìDrive him quickly to his tomb. From Jacques.î             

 A year had gone by, and Mr. Charles Darnay was settled in England. He taught the French language and also had knowledge of French literature. Today he would have been a professor, but back then he was a tutor. He taught young men who had the free time and interest to study another language that was spoken all over the world, and he developed a taste for its knowledge and stories. He could also translate them well into English and read them out loud in English. People with such skills were hard to find at that time. Men who were once princes, and supposed to have become kings, hadnít been forced to work as teachers yet. No ruined nobility had gone broke, lost their accounts at Tellsonís Bank, and become cooks and carpenters yet. Mr. Darnay soon developed a good reputation as a tutor who made his studentís time particularly pleasant and beneficial, and as a graceful translator who brought something to his translations besides what you could find in a dictionary. He knew the situation in France well, and people in England were becoming more and more interested in it. By working tirelessly, he was able to make a good living.              

 He hadnít expected things to be easy for him in London. If he had, he wouldnít have done so well. He had expected hard work, and he found it. He did the work and made the best of it, and by doing this, his success continued.              

 He spent a certain amount of time at Cambridge, where he taught undergraduates. The school tolerated him as he secretly taught European languages, instead of the official Greek and Latin. He spent the rest of his time in London.              

 Now, from the beginning of time in the garden of Eden to the current, harsher times, a manís life has always gone in the same direction. Charles Darnayís life took the same path: he fell in love with a woman.             

 He had been in love with Lucie Manette since he had been on trial for his life. He had never heard a sound so sweet and king as the sound of her voice. He had never seen anyone more beautiful than she had been when they met, when he was about to be executed. But he hadnít told her that he loved her yet. The murder at the empty chateau, over the water and the long, dusty roads far away, had happened a year ago, and now felt like it was part of a dream. Yet he still hadnít mentioned as much as a single word to her about his feelings.              

 He knew well that he had good reasons for keeping quiet. It was a summer day when he arrived in London late after teaching at the college. He turned the corner of the quiet street in Soho where Lucie and Dr. Manette lived. He was set on telling Dr. Manette how he felt about Lucie. It was the end of a summer day, and he knew that Lucie was out with Miss Pross.              

 He found the doctor reading in an armchair near the window. The energy that had supported him when he was a prisoner had gradually come back to him, and he was now a very energetic manóvery driven and decisive. His energy sometimes came and went quickly, as had happened when he first recovered his other faculties, but this didnít happen too often and was happening less and less frequently.             

 He studied a lot, slept little, handled fatigue easily, and was usually cheerful. Charles Darnay now entered the room and went toward him. The doctor put his book down and held out his hand.              

 ìCharles Darnay! Iím happy to see you! We have been expecting you for three or four days. Mr. Stryver and Sydney Carton were both here yesterday and both said you should have visited by now.î             

 ìI am thankful to them for their interest in me,î he answered, a little indifferent about them but very kind to the doctor. ìMiss Manetteóî             

 ìIs doing well,î the doctor continued. ìAnd your return will make us all happy. She is out on some household errands, but she will be home soon.î             

 ìDr. Manette, I knew she wasnít at home. I took the opportunity of her being out to come speak to you.î             

 Dr. Manette was silent.              

 ìYes?î said the doctor, controlling himself. ìBring your chair over here and tell me what it is.î             

 Mr. Darnay brought over the chair as he had been told, but he had trouble saying what he wanted to say.             

 ìI have been lucky, Dr. Manette, to spend the last year and a half enjoying the comfort of your home,î he began after a long while. ìI hope what Iím about to say wonítóî             

 The doctor reached out his hand to stop him. After he had kept it there a little while, he drew back his hand and asked:             

 ìIs Lucie what you want to talk about?î             

 ìShe is.î             

 ìIt is hard for me to talk about her at any time. It is especially hard for me to hear you talk about her in that tone, Charles Darnay.î             

 ìIt is a tone of great admiration, true respect, and deep love, Dr. Manette!î he said respectfully.             

 The doctor was silent again. Then he replied:             

 ìI believe you. I trust you. I believe you.î             

 He was so restrained and so unwilling to talk about the subject that Charles Darnay hesitated.              

 ìShall I continue, sir?î             

 The doctor was silent again.              

 ìYes. Continue.î             

 ìYou know what Iím about to say. But you canít know how serious I am when I say it, and how much I feel it, without knowing my true thoughts and feelings and my deepest hopes and fears. Dr. Manette, I am in love with your daughter. I am devoted to her and think only of her well-being. If there was ever love in the world, I love her. You have been in love yourself. Think of the love you once had in your life when you think of me!î             

 The doctor sat facing away from him, with his eyes on the ground. After Mr. Darnay had said these last words, Dr. Manette stretched out his hand again quickly and said:             

 ìDonít speak of that, sir! Leave that alone! I beg you, donít bring that up!î             

 It sounded so much like he was actually crying out in pain that Charles Darnayís ears rang long after he had stopped. He gestured with the hand he had reached out toward him. He seemed to be asking Darnay to pause. Mr. Darnay stopped speaking.              

 ìIím sorry,î said the doctor quietly after a while. ìI donít doubt that you love Lucie. You should be happy about that.î             

 He turned toward him in his chair but continued to look at the ground. He rested his chin on his hand, and his white hair hung down over his face.              

 ìHave you spoken to Lucie about this?î             

 ìNo.î             

 ìOr written to her about it?î             

 ìNever.î             

 ìIt would be rude to pretend not to know that you have kept yourself away from her out of respect for me. I thank you.î             

 He extended his hand but kept looking at the ground.              

 ìI know,î said Darnay, respectfully. ìHow could I not know that there is an unusual love between you and your daughter, Dr. Manette? I have seen the two of you together day after day. It is so touching, and I know it comes from the extreme circumstances that you have been through together. There can be few relationships between a father and a child like it. I know, Dr. Manetteóhow could I not knowóthat combined with the love of a grown woman for her father, there is, in her heart, the love of an infant for her father as well. I know that since she had no parents when she was a child, she is now devoted to you with all the love of a grown woman, combined with the trust and attachment she never had as a child. I know well that if you had come back from the dead, you could hardly seem more sacred to her than you do now. I know that when she is holding onto you, the hands of a baby, a girl, and a grown woman together are embracing you. I know that in loving you she sees and loves her mother as a young woman. She sees and loves you as a young man. She loves her brokenhearted mother and loves you through your trial and imprisonment through to when you were freed and rehabilitated. I have known this, night and day, since I started to come to visit you here at your home.î             

 Her father sat in silence, facing the ground. His breathing had sped up a little, but otherwise he repressed any signs of being upset.              

 ìMy dear Dr. Manette, having always known this, and always seeing the two of you together, I have restrained myself as long as humanly possible. I have felt, and even feel now, that to bring my love between you is to taint your past with something not quite as good as itself. But I love her. Heaven is my witness that I love her!î             

 ìI believe you,î her father answered sadly. ìI have thought so before now. I believe you.î             

 The sadness in Dr. Manetteís voice struck Darnay as a reproach. ìBut do not believe that if I were ever lucky enough to make her my wife, that I would ever come between you. If that were so, I would never have told you what I am saying now,î said Darnay. ìBesides the fact that I know it would be impossible, I know that it would be an awful thing to do. If I had any such plan, even for many years from now, or could ever consider such a thing, I wouldnít be able to shake your hand right now.î             

 He placed his hand on the doctorís hand as he spoke.              

 ìNo, dear Dr. Manette. Like you, I left France by choice. Like you, I left to get away from the distractions, oppressions, and unhappiness. Like you, I worked to get away and live by my own hard work. I left in search of a better future, and I only want to share in your happiness, to share your life and home, and devote myself to you until death. I donít want to take Lucie away from you as your child and friend, but to tie her closer to you, if such a thing is possible.î              

 He was still holding her fatherís hand. Her father responded by placing his hands on the arms of his chair. He looked up at him for the first time since their conversation had started, and it was obvious that he was struggling with something. He struggled with that dark look that would on occasion appear on his face.              

 ìYou speak so passionately, Charles Darnay, that I thank you with all my heart. I will open my heart to you, or nearly so. Do you have any reason to believe that Lucie loves you?î             

 ìNone. So far, none.î             

 ìAre you hoping to find this out from this conversation?î             

 ìNot at all. I might not have the courage to do it for weeks. I might have the courage to do it tomorrow, whether itís the right time to do it or not.î              

 ìAre you looking for advice from me?î             

 ìIím not asking for any, sir, but I have thought that you might have some to offer, if you thought it was right to do so.î             

 ìAre you hoping for a promise from me?î             

 ìYes, I am.î             

 ìWhat is it?î             

 ìI know that without you I have no hope. I understand that, even if Miss Manette loved me alreadyódonít assume that I am conceited enough to think that she doesóI could ever be loved by her if you didnít approve.î             

 ìIf that is so, do you see what else is involved in it?î             

 ìI also understand that if her father spoke in favor of any of her suitors that it would persuade her more than her own opinion or anything else in the world. For this reason, Dr. Manetteî said Darnay, ìI wouldnít ask you to do that if my life depended on it.î             

 ìIím sure of it. Charles Darnay, people who are close to each other still have secrets, just as people who are far apart. In the first case, those secrets are subtle, delicate, and hard to penetrate. In this way, Lucie is a mystery to me. I donít know how she feels about you.î             

 ìMay I ask you, sir, if you think she isóî as he hesitated, the doctor finished the thought for him.             

 ìIs being courted by another man?î             

 ìThat is what I meant.î             

 Her father thought awhile before he answered:             

 ìYou have seen Mr. Carton here. Mr. Stryver is here too, sometimes. If she is being courted, it would have to be by one of these two men.î             

 ìOr both of them,î said Darnay.             

 ìI hadnít thought of that. I think itís more likely that itís neither of them. You want me to promise you something. Tell me what.î             

 ìPromise me that if Miss Manette ever tells you that she feels the same way about me as I do about her, you will tell her what I have said and that you believe me to be telling the truth. I hope you will think well enough of me as to not speak against me. I ask nothing more than that. Just tell me the conditions that you have, which you have a right to have.î             

 ìI make the promise without any condition,î said the doctor. ìI believe that what you said is true. I believe your intention is to make the bond between my daughter and me stronger, not weaker. If she ever tells me that she loves you, I will give her to you. If there wereóCharles Darnay, if there wereóî             

 Mr. Darnay had taken his hand gratefully. They were holding hands when the doctor said:             

 ìóany ideas, reasons, fears, anything at all, new or old against the man that she was in love withóany wrongdoing that he was not directly responsible foróI would forget them all for the sake of her happiness. She is everything to me. More to me than suffering, more to me than injusticeÖWell! This is pointless talk.î             

 The way he had stopped speaking, and the way he was looking at him, was so strange that Darnayís hand turned cold under the doctorís touch. The doctor slowly let go of him.              

 ìYou said something to me,î said Dr. Manette, smiling. ìWhat was it you said to me?î             

 He didnít know how to answer. Then he remembered that the doctor had spoken about there being a condition to his promise. Darnay was relieved to think of it, and answered:             

 ìYour confidence in me should be returned with confidence in you. You may remember that the name I go by now, although it is only slightly changed from my motherís, is not my own. I want to tell you what my name really is and why I am in England.î              

 ìStop!î said the doctor from Beauvais.              

 ìI want to tell you. So that you will trust me and I will have no secrets from you.             

 ìStop!î             

 For a moment the doctor had covered his own ears with his hands, and a second later he had covered Darnayís mouth with them.              

 ìTell me when I ask you, not now. If you are successful and Lucie loves you, tell me the morning you get married. Do you promise?î             

 ìOf course.î             

 ìGive me your hand. She will be home soon. Itís better that she doesnít see us together tonight. Go! God bless you!î             

 It was dark when Charles Darnay left, and it was darker an hour later when Lucie came home. She hurried into the room alone since Miss Pross had gone straight upstairs and was surprised to find the reading chair empty.              

 ìFather?î she called to him. ìFather dear?î             

 There was no answer, but she heard a faint hammering sound in his bedroom. She tiptoed into the next room and looked into his door and came running back, frightened and crying. ìWhat should I do? What should I do?î             

 Her indecision only lasted a moment. She hurried back and knocked on his door, and she called out to him softly. The hammering stopped when she spoke, and he came out to her. They paced up and down together for a long time.              

 She got out of bed and went to watch him sleep that night. He slept heavily, and his tray of shoemaking tools and his unfinished shoes were all laid out the way they always were.              

 ìMix another bowl of punch, Sydney,î said Mr. Stryver to Mr. Carton that same night, or early in the morning. ìI have something to say to you.î             

 Sydney Carton had been working twice as hard that night, and the night before. He had been working hard for many nights in a row, clearing out a lot of Mr. Stryverís papers before going on a long vacation. The papers had finally been cleared out, and Mr. Stryverís debts had been paid up. Everything was finished until November, when the weather would turn foggy, and legal matters would become complex and foggy too, and there would be work for him again.              

 Sydney wasnít very lively or very sober after working so hard. He had needed extra wet towels on his head to get him through the night. He had needed an extra amount of wine to drink before the towels. He was in bad shape. He pulled the towels off his head and threw them into the basin where he had been dipping them now and again for the last six hours.              

 ìAre you mixing that other bowl of punch?î asked Stryver. He had his hands in his waistband, and he looked over from the sofa where he was lying on his back.          

 ìI am.î             

 ìNow look here! Iím going to tell you something that will surprise you. It might make you think that Iím not as smart as you think I am. I plan on getting married.î             

 ìDo you?î             

 ìYes. And Iím not even marrying for money. What do you say to that?î             

 ìI donít have much to say. Who is she?î             

 ìGuess.î             

 ìDo I know her?î             

 ìGuess.î             

 ìItís five oíclock in the morning! Iím not going to guess. Iím too tired. If you want me to guess youíll have to ask me at lunch.î             

 ìIn that case Iíll tell you,î said Stryver. He sat up slowly. ìSydney, I have trouble explaining myself to you because youíre an insensitive idiot.î             

 ìAnd you,î returned Sydney sarcastically, who was busy mixing the punch, ìare such a sensitive and poetic spiritóî             

 ìCome on!î Stryver replied, laughing arrogantly. ìI donít claim to be a romantic. I hope I know better than to be that. But I am more sensitive than you are.î             

 ìYouíre luckier, you mean.î             

 ìThatís not what I mean. I mean I am a man of moreómoreóî             

 ìSay ëchivalryí while youíre at it,î suggested Carton.             

 ìGood! Iíll say chivalry. What I mean is that I am a man who cares more about being attractive to women than you do. I work harder at it and Iím better at it,î said Stryver. He puffed up his chest as Carton mixed the punch.              

 ìGo on,î said Sydney Carton.             

 ìNo. But before I go on,î said Stryver, shaking his head in his bullying way, ìIíll prove my point. Youíve been to Dr. Manetteís house as often as I have, perhaps even more. Iíve been embarrassed by how depressed you act there! You behave in a such silent and sullen and downcast way that I am embarrassed by you, Sydney!î             

 ìIt is good for a lawyer to be ashamed about something,î answered Sydney. ìYou should thank me.î             

 ìYou wonít get off that easy,î answered Stryver, shoving the response at him. ìNo, Sydney, itís my duty to tell you. Iím telling you to your face to help you. You arenít suited for that kind of company. You are an unpleasant man.î             

 Sydney drank a large glass of the punch he had made and laughed.              

 ìLook at me!î said Stryver, turning toward him. ìI donít need put in any effort to make myself attractive like you do. I am more independent than you are. I make a lot of money and have a good position. So why do I do it?î             

 ìIíve never seen you do it yet,î Carton muttered to himself.              

 ìI do it because itís smart to do it. I do it on principle. And look at me! I do well for myself.î             

 ìYou arenít doing well with your story about your plans to marry,î answered Carton casually. ìI wish you would stay on the subject. And back to meódonít you understand that I am hopeless?î             

 He looked angry when he asked the question.             

 ìYou have no business being hopeless,î answered Stryver harshly.             

 ìI have no business being anything as far as I know,î said Sydney Carton. ìWho is the lady?î             

 ìNow donít get uncomfortable when I tell you who it is, Sydney,î said Mr. Stryver in a falsely friendly way. ìI know you donít mean half of the things you say. And even if you meant all of it, it wouldnít matter to me. Iím saying this because you mentioned the young lady to me in a negative way.î             

 ìI did?î             

 ìYou did. Right here in this apartment.î             

 Sydney Carton looked at his punch, and he looked at his satisfied friend. He drank his punch and looked at his friend again.              

 ìYou called her a golden-haired doll. The young lady is Miss Manette. If you were someone who had any sensitivity or compassion in that way, Sydney, I might have been unhappy about what you said. But you arenít. You have no sense at all. Therefore I am no more upset by what you said than I would be if a man who knows nothing about art criticized one of my paintings. Or if a man who knows nothing about music criticized a piece I had written.î              

 Sydney Carton drank his punch quickly. He drank it by the glassful. He kept looking at Stryver.              

 ìNow you know all about it, Syd,î said Mr. Stryver. ìI donít care about money. She is a charming woman, and I have decided to make myself happy. Overall I think I can afford to be happy. I will be a husband who is already somewhat wealthy, and I am doing better and better for myself. I have some respect. It is lucky for her, but she deserves good luck. Are you surprised?î             

 Carton, still drinking his punch, answered ìWhy should I be surprised?î             

 ìDo you approve?î             

 Carton was still drinking his punch. ìWhy shouldnít I approve?î             

 ìWell!î said Cartonís friend Stryver, ìyouíre taking it better than I thought you would. And you arenít as protective of me as I would have thought. Though you know pretty well that your old friend is pretty strong willed. Yes, Sydney, I am tired of continuing this lifestyle. I think itís nice for a man to have a home to go back to when he wants to (when he doesnít, he can always stay away). I feel that Miss Manette will be presentable in any company and will make me look good. So I have decided to marry her. And now, Sydney, old friend, I want to say something to you about your hopes. You are doing poorly for yourself, I know. You really are. You donít understand the value of money. You drink a lot. There will come a time when you are sick and poor. You should really think about getting a nurse.î             

 Mr. Stryver spoke to him like a successful father speaking to his son. He looked twice the size he really was, and four times more unpleasant.              

 ìNow, let me suggest,î continued Stryver, ìthat you face the reality of your future. I have faced it in a different way. You should face it in your own way. Get married. Find someone to take care of you. Forget that you donít enjoy spending time with women, or understand them, or want to get married. Find someone. Find a respectable woman who has a little property. Find some landlady or hotelkeeper and marry her, in case your health goes. Thatís what you need to do. Think about it, Sydney.î             

 ìIíll think about it,î said Sydney.             

 Mr. Stryver, having made up his mind to be nice enough to marry Lucie Manette, decided to give her the good news before he left town on his long vacation. After thinking it over for a while he decided that it would be best to ask her right away and get it over with. Then they could take their time deciding whether they should get married a week or two before   Michaelmas term sometime in late October  Michaelmas term  or during the Christmas vacation between Michaelmas and   Hilary term between November 25 and January 11  Hilary term .             

 He had no doubt that she would want to marry him and was sure she would say yes. He thought of it as a court case. If he argued his case in practical termsóthe only terms worth consideringóit was a clear case without any weaknesses. He called himself as a witness for the plaintiff. His evidence was unbeatable. The counsel for the defendant gave up his case, and the jury didnít even need to stop to discuss their verdict. After trying the case, Mr. Stryver, Chief Justice, knew that it was an open-and-shut case.             

 Accordingly, Mr. Stryver decided to begin his long vacation with a formal offer to take Miss Manette to Vauxhall Gardens. If that didnít work, he would take her to Ranelagh. If that failed too, he would go to her house in Soho and tell her how he felt about her there.              

 Mr. Stryver shoved his way through the streets from Temple Bar toward Soho at the beginning of his long vacation. As he headed toward Soho, while he was still on Saint Dunstanís side of Temple Bar, he rushed in his all-out way along the sidewalk, shoving aside all weaker people. Anybody who had seen him would have noticed how invulnerable and strong he was.              

 His path took him past Tellsonís Bank, and since he did his banking at Tellsonís and knew that Mr. Lorry was a close friend of the Manettes, he decided to go in and tell Mr. Lorry about his plans to propose to Miss Manette. He pushed open the creaky door and stumbled down the two steps leading into the bank and walked past the two old cashiers. He shoved his way into the small, dirty back office where Mr. Lorry sat. In front of him were large books with lined columns of numbers in them. There were horizontal iron bars on his window, as if the window had been ruled for crunching numbers too, and everything under the clouds were a math problem.              

 ìHello!î said Mr. Stryver. ìHow do you do? I hope you are well!î             

 Mr. Stryverís oddest characteristic was that he always appeared too big for whatever space he was in. He seemed so large in Tellsonís that old clerks in far corners looked up in protest as though he were squeezing them against the wall. The head of the bank, reading a paper far away, lowered it unhappily, as if Mr. Stryver had head-butted him in the stomach.              

 Mr. Lorry said in a quiet, professional tone, ìHow do you do, Mr. Stryver? How do you do, sir?î He shook Mr. Stryverís hand. There was a strangeness in the way Mr. Lorry shook hands. All the clerks at Tellsonís shook hands this way when the head of the bank was there. He shook hands in an impersonal way, as if he were shaking hands on behalf of the whole company.              

 ìCan I do anything for you, Mr. Stryver? asked Mr. Lorry in a professional way.              

 ìWhy, no, thank you. This is a personal visit, Mr. Lorry. I have come to have a word with you in private.î              

 ìOh, really?î said Mr. Lorry. He leaned down so that he could hear him but kept looking at the head of the bank far away.              

 ìI am going,î said Mr. Stryver, leaning on the desk. When he did, although the desk was very large, it looked as though there werenít even half enough desk for him. ìI am going to ask your friend, Miss Manette, to marry me, Mr. Lorry.î             

 ìOh dear me!î yelled Mr. Lorry, rubbing his chin and looking at Mr. Stryver doubtfully.              

 ìëOh, dear me,í sir?î repeated Stryver, pulling away. ìOh, dear you, sir? What do you mean, Mr. Lorry?î             

 ìI mean it in a friendly way,î answered Mr. Lorry professionally. ìIt speaks well for you, and, in short, I wish you everything you desire. But really, you know, Mr. Stryveróî Mr. Lorry paused. He shook his head at him strangely, as if he couldnít help thinking, ìYou know, you are just too large!î             

 ìWell!î said Stryver, slapping the desk with his hand, opening his eyes wide, and taking a deep breath. ìIf I understand what youíre saying, Mr. Lorry, then you think she will not accept!î             

 Mr. Lorry adjusted his little wig at his ears and bit the feather tip of his quill pen.              

 ìDamn it all, sir!î said Stryver. He looked at him intensely. ìArenít I good enough to marry her?î             

 ìOh, dear, yes! Yes, youíre good enough!î said Mr. Lorry. ìIf the question is if youíre good enough, then yes, youíre good enough.î             

 ìArenít I successful?î asked Stryver.             

 ìOh! If youíre asking if you are successful, then yes. You are successful,î said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìAnd arenít I becoming more successful?î             

 ìIf the question is if youíre becoming more successful, then no one can doubt that,î said Mr. Lorry, who was thrilled to be able to agree with him.              

 ìThen what on earth do you mean, Mr. Lorry?î asked Mr. Stryver, visibly hurt.          

 ìWell! Iówere you on your way to Miss Manetteís house right now?î asked Mr. Lorry.             

 ìIím going straight there!î said Stryver, with a thump of his fat fist on the desk.              

 ìI think I wouldnít do that if I were you.î             

 ìWhy not?î asked Stryver. ìNow I want to know the truth from you.î He pointed his finger at him and shook it. ìYou are a businessman and you must have a reason. Tell me your reason. Why wouldnít you go?î             

 ìBecause I wouldnít do such a thing unless I had some reason to think that I would succeed,î said Mr. Lorry.              

 ìDamn me!î yelled Stryver. ìDoesnít that beat all!î             

 Mr. Lorry looked at the head banker in the corner and looked back at Mr. Stryver, who was now angry.              

 ìYou are a businessman. You are old and experienced. You work in a bank,î said Mr. Stryver. ìAnd just having told you three good reasons why I should succeed, you say there is no reason at all! You say it with your head on your shoulders!î Mr. Stryver commented on it as if it would have been less surprising if he had said it with his head off his shoulders.              

 ìWhen I talk about success, Iím talking about success with the young lady. And when I talk about reasons why you would be likely to succeed, I talk about reasons that would persuade the young lady. The young lady, my good sir,î said Mr. Lorry tapping Stryver gently on the arm, ìThe young ladyís happiness is the most important thing.î             

 ìThen what youíre telling me, Mr. Lorry,î said Stryver turning toward him, ìis that you think Miss Manette is an idiot?î             

 ìNot exactly. What I mean, Mr. Stryver,î said Mr. Lorry, who was turning red in the face, ìis that I will not let anyone speak badly of Miss Manette. If I knew any manóand I hope I do notówho had such poor taste and such a bad temper that he couldnít keep himself from speaking badly of Miss Manette here at my desk, even the fact that we are in Tellsonís Bank wouldnít stop me from telling him off.î             

 The fact that Mr. Stryver was so angry but had to keep his voice down made his veins stand out. Mr. Lorryís veins, as calm as they usually were, were just as bad now that it was his turn to speak.              

 ìThat is what Iím trying to tell you, sir,î said Mr. Lorry. ìLetís be clear about that.î             

 Mr. Stryver sucked on the end of a ruler for a little while, then stood tapping the ruler against his teeth, which probably gave him a toothache. He broke the awkward silence by saying:             

 ìThis is strange to me, Mr. Lorry. You are telling me not to go to Miss Manetteís house in Soho and offer myself to her. Me! Stryver, the successful lawyer of the Kingís Bench bar?î             

 ìAre you asking me for advice, Mr. Stryver?î             

 ìYes, I am.î             

 ìVery good. Then I have given you my advice and you have repeated it correctly.î             

 ìAll I can say to that,î laughed Stryver, who was clearly annoyed, ìis that thisóha, ha! This beats everything!î             

 ìNow understand,î continued Mr. Lorry. ìAs a businessman, I am not qualified to say anything about this. As a businessman, I know nothing about love and marriage. But as an old man who carried Miss Manette in his arms when she was a baby, and as a trusted friend of Miss Manette and of her father who cares very much for both of them, I have spoken. Remember, I did not come to you with this advice. You came to me. Now, do you think I might be wrong?î             

 ìNot I!î said Stryver, whistling. ìI canít seem to find third parties with common sense. I can only find it in myself. I believe I have sense in certain matters. You believe nonsense. Itís new to me, but I think you might be right.î             

 ìI believe what I believe, Mr. Stryver. And understand, sir,î said Mr. Lorry, quickly turning red again, ì I will notónot even in Tellsonís Bankóhave another man alive criticize me for it.î              

 ìI beg your pardon!î said Stryver.             

 ìThen I give you my pardon. Thank you. Well, Mr. Stryver, I was about to say that it might hurt to realize that you are wrong. It might hurt Dr. Manette to have to explain it to you. It might hurt Miss Manette very much to have to explain it to you. You know that I am lucky enough to have a close relationship with the family. If you donít mind, without committing you or representing you in any way, I will try to gather some more information and judge its meaning so I can give you the best advice. If you then disagree with my advice, you can try it out for yourself. If, on the other hand, you agree with it, it might spare everyone a lot of trouble. What do you say?î              

 ìHow long would I have to stay in town?î             

 ìOh! Only a few hours. I could go to the Manetteís house in Soho tonight and come to your apartment afterward.î             

 ìThen I agree,î said Stryver. ìI wonít go there now. Iím not so anxious that I need to do that. I agree and I will wait for you to go there tonight. Good day.î             

 Then Mr. Stryver turned away and charged out of Tellsonís Bank. He caused such a forceful breeze to follow him that it almost knocked over the two old clerks. The two old men were always bowing to the customers on their way out, and many people believed that after they had bowed a customer out, they just kept bowing in the empty office until another customer came in and brought them back upright.              

 Mr. Stryver was smart enough to realize that the banker wouldnít have said so much about his opinion unless he were sure of it. As unprepared as he was to receive Mr. Lorryís unwanted advice, he followed it. ìAnd now,î said Mr. Stryver, pointing his finger and shaking it at all of Temple Bar, ìmy way out of this is to prove youíre all wrong.î             

 He soothed himself with a trick used by lawyers at the Old Bailey. ìYou wonít prove me wrong, Miss Manette,î said Mr. Stryver. ìIíll prove myself wrong.î             

 So, when Mr. Lorry came to Mr. Stryverís place at ten oíclock that night, Mr. Stryver had surrounded himself with piles of books and papers. He seemed to have no interest in their conversation from the morning. He even acted surprised when he saw Mr. Lorry and pretended to be preoccupied and distracted.              

 ìWell!î said Mr. Lorry pleasantly, after spending half an hour trying unsuccessfully to get Mr. Stryver to bring up the subject. ì I have been to Soho.î             

 ìTo Soho?î repeated Mr. Stryver indifferently. ìOh, yes, of course! What was I thinking?î             

 ìAnd Iím sure,î said Mr. lorry, ìthat I was right when we talked this morning. My opinion has been confirmed, and I repeat the same advice to you.î             

 ìIím sorry for your sake and sorry for her fatherís sake,î said Mr. Stryver in his friendliest way. ìI know this must be a difficult subject for the family. Letís not talk about it again.î             

 ìI donít understand you,î said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìApparently not,î he answered, nodding his head. ìIt doesnít matter.î             

 ìBut it does matter,î Mr. Lorry said.              

 ìNo it doesnít. I promise you it doesnít. I had thought that Miss Manette was a sensible, ambitious woman. I was mistaken. But there is no harm done. Young women have made similar mistakes many times before and have been sorry for them when they ended up poor and forgotten. In an unselfish way, I am sorry that the marriage is not happening because it would have been bad for me from a practical point of view. In a selfish way, I am glad that itís not happening, because it would have been bad for me from a practical point of view. Itís obvious that I wouldnít have gained anything by it. There is no harm done. I havenít proposed to Miss Manette, and, just between you and me, I am not sure, now that I think about it, that I should have even thought about it. Mr. Lorry, you canít control the changing fancies of empty-headed girls. You canít expect to, or you will always be disappointed. Now, please, letís not talk about it anymore. I tell you, Iím sorry about it for their sake, but I am happy about it for my own sake. I am grateful to you for letting me talk to you about it and for giving me your advice. You know Miss Manette better than I do. You were right. It never would have worked.î             

 Mr. Lorry was so surprised that he stared blankly at Mr. Stryver as Mr. Stryver shoved him toward the front door and pretended to be in a good mood. ìMake the best of it, my dear sir,î said Stryver. ìLetís talk no more about it. Thanks again for allowing me to talk to get your opinion. Good night!î             

 Mr. Lorry was standing outside in the darkness before he knew where he was, and Mr. Stryver was lying on his sofa, blinking at the ceiling.              

 If Sydney Carton ever made a good impression anywhere, it was certainly never at Dr. Manetteís house. He had been going there regularly for a whole year, and he always spent his time there lying around in a grumpy mood. When he said anything, he spoke well, but his apathy cast a shadow over him, and his good heart rarely shined through.             

 He did, however, like the streets that surrounded the Manettesí house, and the cobblestones that made them up. Many nights he would end up wandering sadly around their neighborhood, after drinking wine all night had failed to improve his mood. Many times he would be wandering near their house at sunrise, and often he would still be there when the first rays of sun hit the church steeple and tall buildings. Perhaps these quiet mornings made him think happy thoughts that he forgot about at other times during the day. Lately, he had spent less time than ever in his unmade bed at Temple Court. Often, after he had come home and thrown himself on it for just a few minutes, he would get up again and wander around the Manettesí neighborhood.              

 One day in August, when Mr. Stryver (after telling Mr. Carton that he had decided not to get married) had gone to Devonshire, Mr. Carton wandered around near the Manetteís house. The sight and smell of flowers in the city gave a sense of goodness to even the worst people, a feeling of health to the sickliest, and an air of youth to the oldest. At first Mr. Carton wandered aimlessly. Then he was struck by an idea. He walked purposefully to Dr. Manetteís door.              

 The servant brought him upstairs and he found Lucie working there alone. She had never been comfortable when he was around, and she was a little embarrassed when he arrived and sat down near her at her table. She looked at his face after they exchanged a few pleasantries and noticed that something was different about him.             

 ìYou look sick, Mr. Carton!î             

 ìNo. But I live an unhealthy lifestyle, Miss Manette. What can you expect from someone as decadent as I am?î             

 ìForgive me for asking, but wouldnít it be better to live a better life?î             

 ìGod knows itís a shame that I donít!î             

 ìThen why not change the way you live?î             

 She looked at him gently again, surprised and sad to see that he was crying. His voice sounded sad, too, as he answered:             

 ìItís too late for that. I will never be better than I am now. Iíll only get worse and worse.î             

 He leaned his elbow on the table and covered his eyes with his hand. The table trembled as he cried on it silently.             

 She had never seen him so vulnerable, and it was upsetting to her. He could tell that she was upset, so without looking at her, he said:             

 ìPlease forgive me, Miss Manette. Iím crying because of what Iím about to say to you. Will you listen to me?î             

 ìIf it will make you happy, Mr. Carton, I would be glad to.î             

 ìGod bless you for being so kind.î             

 After a little while he removed his hand from his face, and he spoke steadily.             

 ìDonít be afraid to listen to me. Donít pull away from what I say. I am like someone who has died young. My whole life is a missed opportunity.î             

 ìNo, Mr. Carton. I bet the best is still to come. Iím sure that you might make yourself proud.î             

 ìThatís nice of you to say, Miss Manette. And although I know it isnít true, I will never forget it.î             

 She was pale and shaking, and he tried to soothe her. He was filled with a misery and self-loathing that made the conversation unlike any other.              

 ìI am a wasteful, drunken, poor, abused creature. If it had been possible for you to love me, Miss Manette, I would have known that, although I was happy, I would only make you unhappy. I would bring you sorrow and regret. I would disgrace you and bring you down with me. I know that you have no feelings for me, and I donít ask you to. I am even happy that you donít.î             

 ìCanít I help you, even though I donít love you, Mr. Carton? Forgive me, but canít I help you put your life on a better path? Canít I repay your trust in me? I know you are putting trust in me by telling me this,î she said modestly after hesitating a bit, with genuine tears. ìI know that you wouldnít tell anyone else this. Canít I turn this into something that will help you, Mr. Carton?î             

 He shook his head.             

 ìYou canít help me at all. No, Miss Manette. If you will listen to me a little while longer, you will have done everything you could do for me. I want you to know that you have been my last hope. I havenít been so lost that the sight of you with your father, and of this house that youíve made into a home, has made me remember things that I thought I had forgotten forever. Since Iíve known you, I have been bothered by a remorse that I thought would never bother me again. I have heard voices encouraging me to be better that I thought had disappeared forever. I have had vague thoughts about starting over again. I have imagined myself giving up laziness and sin and fighting for whatís right in the world. Itís all a dream, of course, that wonít amount to anything. But I want you to know that you inspired me to have these thoughts.î              

 ìNothing will come of it? Oh, Mr. Carton, think about it again! Try to start over!î             

 ìNo, Miss Manette. All this time I have known that I do not deserve it. And yet I have been weak enough, and still am weak enough, to want you to know how you took me, a poor, broken man, and made me want to be a better man. But still, I will only waste away and amount to nothing.î             

 ìSince I have caused you to be more unhappy than you were before you knew me, Mr. Cartonóî             

 ìDonít say that, Miss Manette. If anyone could have saved me, it would have been you. You will not be the reason I get worse.î             

 ìSince the condition that you have described is partly my faultóthatís what you mean, if I can say it plainlyócanít I be of service to you? Am I not able to help you at all?î             

 ìThe most good that I can do now, Miss Manette, is why I have come here. Let me live the rest of my wasteful life knowing that I told you my feelings and that there was still something left in me now worth pitying.î             

 ìI beg you again and again to believe that you are able to do better things with your life, Mr. Carton!î             

 ìDonít beg me to believe it anymore, Miss Manette. I know what I am. Iím upsetting you, so I will finish what I have to say. Will you let me believe, when I remember this day, that I told you the last secret of my life and that you kept it? And that no one will ever know about it?î             

 ìIf that will bring you comfort, yes.î             

 ìNot even the person you love the most?î             

 ìMr. Carton,î she answered after pausing nervously, ìitís your secret, not mine. I promise to respect that and to tell no one.î             

 ìThank you. And again, God bless you.î             

 He kissed her hand and walked toward the door.              

 ìDonít worry. I will never continue this conversation with you again, Miss Manette. I will never mention it. That couldnít be more certain than if I were dead. When I die, I will cherish my one good memory. I shall thank and bless you for the fact that the last good words I spoke about myself were spoken to you. And that my name, my faults, and my cares were told to you. Otherwise I hope you are happy and carefree!î              

 He was acting so unlike he ever had before, and it was so sad to think about what he threw away with his wasted and debauched life, that Lucie Manette cried for him. He stood there looking at her.              

 ìTake comfort!î he said. ìI am not worth crying over, Miss Manette. An hour or two from now, when I join my lowlife friends and their sinful habits, I will be less worth your tears than any poor wretch on the streets. Take comfort! But in my heart, when I think of you, I will always be the man I am now, although on the outside I will be the man you have always known me to be. My last request is that you will believe this.î              

 ìI will, Mr. Carton.î             

 ìI will leave soon, freeing you from me. You and I have nothing in common, and there is a wide gap between us. But this is my last request. It is useless to say it, I know, but I canít help myself. I would do anything for you or the people you care about. If I were capable of making a sacrifice for you, I would sacrifice anything for you or the people you love. Think of me now and again, in quiet times, and know that I mean what I say. Sometime soon you will get married and have a family. Oh, Miss Manette, when you look down one day and see the resemblance of your husbandís face in your child smiling up at you, or when you see a beautiful little girl like yourself at your feet, remember now and then that there is a man who would die to keep someone you love beside you.î              

 He said a final ìFarewell, God bless you!î and left.              

 Mr. Jeremiah Cruncher saw many different things move past him as he sat on his stool on Fleet Street, with his grubby little son beside him. Who could sit on Fleet Street during the busy hours of the day and not be overwhelmed by the noise and sight of the two great streams of people going about their day? One was always heading west, and the other always heading east. Both were always heading toward the valleys past where the sun sets.              

 Mr. Cruncher sat watching the two streams with a straw in his mouth, looking like a country farmer who has sat for hundreds of years keeping watch over one stream. Jerry, though, didnít expect that the stream would ever dry up. He wouldnít want it to dry up, since a small amount of his income came from helping timid, well-dressed older women cross from Tellson Bankís side of the street to the other side. As short as these encounters were, Mr. Cruncher always became so friendly with these women that he would tell them that he wanted to drink to their health. They gave him money to do just that, adding to his income.             

 There was a time when a poet might sit on a stool in public and contemplate the men he saw. Mr. Cruncher, sitting on his stool in public, wasnít a poet. He thought as little as possible and just looked around.              

 He happened to be sitting and staring at a time when there werenít many people out, so there were very few women to help across the street. He was doing so poorly that he started to suspect that his wife must have been praying against him. Just then an unusual group came hurrying down Fleet Street heading west. Mr. Cruncher looked their way and could see some kind of funeral moving along. He could tell that people were angry about it.              

 ìYoung Jerry,î said Mr. Cruncher, turning to his son. ìItís a funeral.î             

 ìHooray, Father!î cried Young Jerry.              

 The boy yelled his cheer with mysterious significance. His father was so upset by his cheer that he waited until no one was looking and then smacked the boy on the ear.              

 ìWhat do you mean? What are you hooraying at? What are you trying to tell your father, you young punk? This boy is too much for me!î said Mr. Cruncher, looking at his son. ìHim and his hoorays! Donít let me hear any more out of you or Iíll hit you again. Do you hear me?î             

 ìI wasnít doing anything wrong,î protested Young Jerry, rubbing his cheek.          

 ìStop it then,î said Mr. Cruncher. ìI donít want to hear you say you did nothing wrong. Get up on that stool and look at the crowd.î             

 His son obeyed, and the crowd came closer. They were crying and wailing around a dingy hearse and a dingy funeral coach. There was only one mourner in the funeral coach. He was dressed in the dingy mourning clothes considered appropriate for the situation. He didnít seem happy to be there, though, as the mob was growing larger around the coach. They were making fun of him and making faces at him. They kept yelling out, ìYah! Spies! Tst! Yaha! Spies!î with many other insults too offensive to repeat.              

 Mr. Cruncher always liked funerals. He always paid close attention to them and got excited when a funeral went past Tellsonís Bank. Naturally, therefore, he was especially excited about a funeral with such an unusual crowd following it. He asked the first man who ran into him:             

 ìWhatís happening, my friend? Whatís it all about?î             

 ìI donít know,î said the man. The man went back to yelling at the coach, ìSpies! Yaha! Tst! Spies!î             

 He asked another man. ìWho is it?î             

 ìI donít know,î answered the other man. Still, he cupped his hands around his mouth and loudly shouted, ìSpies! Yaha! Tst, tst! Spióies!î             

 After a while, a person with more information ran into him. This person told Mr. Cruncher that the funeral was of a man named Roger Cly.             

 ìWas he a spy?î asked Mr. Cruncher.             

 ìHe was an Old Bailey spy,î answered the man. He went on yelling at the coach, ìYaha! Tst! Yah! Old Bailey spióióies!î             

 ìWhy, of course!î said Jerry, remembering the trial he had helped with. ìIíve seen him. Is he dead?î             

 ìDead as   mutton meat from a sheep  mutton ,î answered the other man. ìAnd he canít be too dead. Have íem out! Spies! Pull them out! Spies!î             

 The mob thought that this was a good idea, since it was the only idea anyone had suggested. They all started repeating the manís suggestion to ìhave íem out and pull íem out.î They pushed so close to the two vehicles that they came to a stop. Once the crowd opened the doors of the coach, the one mourner came out by himself and was taken by the crowd for a moment. He was so quick, though, that a moment later he had gotten away from them and was running down a side street after slipping out of his coat, hat, long hat band, white handkerchief, and other symbols of mourning.              

 The crowd tore his clothes to pieces and threw them around happily. The shopkeepers nearby quickly closed up their shops, for in those days mobs stopped at nothing and could cause a lot of destruction. They had already gone so far as to open the hearse to take the coffin out when some genius suggested instead that they bring it to its destination while they celebrate the death. Since there werenít many good ideas being suggested, this too was accepted happily by the mob. Immediately, the coach was filled with eight people inside and twelve outside, while as many people as could fit climbed onto the roof. Among the first to do so was Jerry Cruncher, who covered his spiked head of hair in the far corner of the mourning coach so that no one from Tellsonís Bank would recognize him.             

 The undertakers in charge complained about this takeover of the funeral procession. The river, however, was dangerously close by, and several members of the crowd mentioned how effective a dunking in cold water could be in getting stubborn officials to change their minds. The undertakers didnít complain too much after that. The new procession started with a chimneysweep driving the hearse, with the regular driver sitting beside him and directing him. The pie maker, aided by his cabinet minister, drove the mourning coach. A   bear leader a person with a bear who performed for money  bear leader , who was a popular type of street person in London back then, joined the crowd before they had gotten very far down the Strand. His bear, which was black and mangy, caused an air of seriousness in his part of the procession.              

 Thus the procession continued down the street, with the crowd drinking beer, smoking pipes, singing songs, and some people doing mocking impressions of people in mourning. More and more people joined the mob as it went, and all the shops closed as it approached. It was heading for the old church of Saint Pancras, far off in the country. Eventually it arrived there, and the crowd insisted on all going into the burial ground. There they finally buried the dead Roger Cly as they wanted, and to their great satisfaction.              

 With the dead man buried, and the crowd needing some other entertainment for itself, another genius (or perhaps the same one) had the idea of accusing unsuspecting passers-by of being Old Bailey spies and harassing them. The mob chased down dozens of innocent people who had never even been near the Old Bailey in their lives and knocked them around and abused them. The transition to breaking windows and robbing pubs came easily and naturally. Finally, after several hours, when several summerhouses had been pulled down and some fences had been broken and used as weapons by some of the more violent people, a rumor started that the Guards were coming. As the rumor spread, the crowd started to disperse. The Guards may or may not have actually ever come, but this is how mobs usually ended.              

 Mr. Cruncher didnít take part in the final events, but had stayed at the churchyard to talk with the undertakers. The churchyard was calming to him. He got a pipe from a nearby pub and smoked it as he looked at the fences and thoughtfully considered the graveyard.              

 ìJerry,î said Mr. Cruncher, talking to himself in his usual way. ìYou saw that Cly man that day at the Old Bailey. You saw with your own eyes that he was a young, respectable-looking man.î             

 He finished his pipe and thought to himself awhile longer. Then he turned around and headed back so that he would be seen at his place outside of Tellsonís Bank at closing time. Whether his thoughts on death had made him feel sick, or whether he had been feeling unhealthy before that, or whether he wanted to pay a visit to an important man doesnít matter. What matters is that he made a short visit to his doctor, a respected surgeon, on his way back.              

 Young Jerry had covered for his father in his absence and told him that there had been no work while he was gone. The bank closed, the old clerks came out, the watchmen took their place, and Mr. Cruncher and his son went home to tea.          

 ìI tell you, now,î Mr. Cruncher told his wife as he came in, ìif, as an honest businessman, my plans go wrong tonight, Iíll know that you have been praying against me and Iíll punish you for it just the same as if Iíd seen you do it.î             

 The unhappy Mrs. Cruncher shook her head.              

 ìWhy, youíre doing it in front of my face!î said Mr. Cruncher, angry and anxious.              

 ìIím not saying anything.î             

 ìWell, then, donít think anything either. You might as well kneel down and pray as think. You might as well betray me one way or another. Just stop it altogether.î             

 ìYes, Jerry,î said his wife.             

 ìëYes, Jerry,íî repeated Mr. Cruncher sitting down to his tea. ìAh! Thatís right. ëYes, Jerry.í Thatís about all you are allowed to say. You may say ëYes, Jerry.íî             

 Mr. Cruncher didnít mean anything particular with these words, but he used them sarcastically, as people often do, to express unhappiness.             

 ìYou and your ëYes, Jerry,íî said Mr. Cruncher, taking a bite of his bread and butter. He seemed to take an invisible oyster out of his saucer and eat it. ìAh! I think so. I believe you.î             

 ìYouíre going out tonight?î asked his decent wife after he had taken another bite.î             

 ìYes, I am.î             

 ìCan I go with you, Father?î asked his son quickly.              

 ìNo, you canít. Iím going fishing, as your mother knows. Thatís where Iím going. Iím going fishing.î             

 ìYour fishing rod gets pretty rusty, doesnít it, Father?î             

 ìNever mind that.î             

 ìAre you going to bring any fish home, Father?î             

 ìIf I donít, youíll have very little food tomorrow,î answered his father, shaking his head. ìThatís enough questions from you. Iím not going out until youíve been in bed for a long time.î             

 He spent the rest of the night watching Mrs. Cruncher closely. He kept talking to her so that she wouldnít have time to think any evil thoughts about him. He told his son to keep talking to her too for the same reason, and he harassed the woman by talking about all the complaints he had against her rather than leave her to her own thoughts for a moment. The most religious person couldnít have believed more in the power of honest prayer than he believed in his wifeís plotting against him. It was as if a person who says he doesnít believe in ghosts were frightened by a ghost story.              

 ìAnd remember!î said Mr. Cruncher. ì Donít play around tomorrow! If I, an honest businessman, am able to put a joint of meat on the table, you wonít decide to not eat it and only eat bread. And if I, an honest businessman, am able to get a little bit of beer, you wonít decide to only drink water. When in Rome, do as the Romans do. Rome will treat you poorly if you donít.     I am your Rome, you know.              

 Then he began mumbling again:             

 ìYou, turning down your own food and drink! I donít know why you make it so hard for me to find food and drink, with your kneeling and praying and heartless behavior. Look at our son. He is your son, isnít he? Heís as thin as a board. You call yourself a mother? Donít you know that a motherís first duty is to make her son fat and healthy?î             

 Young Jerry was moved by this, and he begged his mother to perform the first duty of a mother and, whatever other parental duties she neglected, to put special emphasis on making him fat and healthy.              

 This is how the Cruncher family spent the evening until Young Jerry was sent to bed. Mr. Cruncher also sent Mrs. Cruncher to bed, and she obeyed. Mr. Cruncher spent the early part of the night smoking pipes alone and didnít go out on his errand until nearly one oíclock in the morning. Around that time, he got up from his chair, took a key out of his pocket, opened a locked cupboard, and took out a sack, a large crowbar, a rope, a chain, and other ìfishing equipment.î Gathering these things about him, he muttered a last insult to Mrs. Cruncher, put out the light, and went out.              

 Young Jerry, who had only pretended to undress when he was sent to bed, snuck out and followed his father. Hidden by the darkness, he followed him out of the room, down the stairs, through the courtyard, and into the streets. He wasnít worried about getting back into the house again without a key. There were many lodgers staying there, and the front door was always left ajar all night.             

 Young Jerry was driven by a wish to learn the skills and secrets his father of his fatherís ìhonestî work. He kept close to the house fronts, walls, and doorways as he kept his eyes on his father. His father was heading north and had not gone far when he was joined by another follower of   Izaak Walton an English writer who wrote about fishing  Izaak Walton , and the two men walked on together.              

 Within half an hour from when they set out, they were beyond the street lamps and the sleeping watchmen and were out on a deserted road. Another ìfishermanî was picked up there. He joined them so quietly that if Young Jerry had been superstitious he might have thought that the second follower had actually split in two and become two people.              

 The three men continued on, and Young Jerry followed them, until the three stopped under a bank hanging out over the road. On the top of the bank there was a low brick wall, and on top of the wall was an iron railing. In the shadow of the bank and wall the three men turned into a hidden lane. The wall, which was about eight or ten feet high there, formed one side of the lane. Young Jerry crouched down in a corner and peeked into the lane. The next thing Young Jerry saw was his father in the moonlight. He was climbing an iron gate and soon had climbed over it. Then the second, and then the third man also climbed over it. They all landed quietly on the ground on the other side of the gate and lied there a littleólistening perhaps. Then they crawled away on their hands and knees.              

 It was Young Jerryís turn to go over to the gate, and he did it holding his breath. Crouching down in a corner again, he looked in and saw the three men crawling through some dirty grass. They were in a large churchyard. All of the gravestones looked like white ghosts that were watching them, and the church tower looked the ghost of an ugly giant. They hadnít crawled far when they stopped and stood up. Then they began to dig.              

 First they dug with a shovel. Shortly after, Mr. Cruncher appeared to be using some sort of tool like a large corkscrew. Whatever tools they used, they worked hard until the chimes of the churchís clock struck. The sound scared Young Jerry so much that he ran off with his hair sticking up like his fatherís.              

 But Young Jerry was so anxious to know what the men were doing that he stopped and went back again. The men were still digging when he peeked in through the gate a second time. They seemed to have found something. There was a noise like a screw being turned coming from the ground, and the menís fingers strained as if they were lifting something heavy. Little by little the heavy object broke through the dirt and came to the surface. Young Jerry knew very well what it was. When he saw it, and saw his father about to open it, he was so scared since heíd never seen anything like that before that he ran away again. He didnít stop running until he had run a mile or more.              

 He wouldnít even have stopped then if he hadnít run out of breath. It was like he was running a ghostly race and he desperately wanted to reach the finish line. He felt like the coffin he had seen was chasing him, and he imagined it hopping behind him, standing upright on its narrow end. It was always close to catching him and was sometimes hopping right beside him. He imagined it grabbing his arm, and he wanted to get away from it. It seemed to be everywhere at once. He ran out into the road and avoided dark alleys, fearing it would come hopping out after him like a boyís kite without its tail and wings. He imagined it hiding in doorways too. It would rub its shoulders against doors and lift them up to its ears as if it were laughing. It came out of the shadows on the road and lied on its back to trip him. All this time he still pictured it hopping behind him and gaining on him, so when Young Jerry got to his front door he was so tired he was half dead. But even then it wouldnít leave him alone. He imagined that it followed him up the stairs and into his bedroom, climbed into bed with him, and still wouldnít leave him alone in his sleep.              

 Young Jerry was woken up from his disturbed sleep in his little room by the sound of his father in the family room. It was after daybreak and before sunrise. Something had gone wrong for his father. At least thatís what Young Jerry assumed, since he was holding Mrs. Cruncher by the ears and knocking the back of her head against the headboard of their bed.              

 ìI told you I would,î said Mr. Cruncher, ìand I did.î             

 ìJerry, Jerry, Jerry!î his wife begged.              

 ìYou pray that Iíll fail in my business dealings,î said Jerry, ìand then my partners and I suffer. Youíre supposed to honor and obey your husband. Why the devil wonít you?î             

 ìI try to be a good wife, Jerry,î the poor woman argued, crying.             

 ìIs it being a good wife to sabotage your husbandís business? Is it honoring your husband to dishonor his business? Is it obeying your husband to disobey him on the important subject of his work?î             

 ìYou hadnít started this terrible work back when I made those vows, Jerry.î             

 ìYou should be satisfied to be married to an honest businessman,î snapped Mr. Cruncher. ìDonít concern your female mind with thoughts about when he was doing his job and when he wasnít. A wife who honored and obeyed her husband would leave his work alone altogether. You call yourself a religious woman? If youíre a religious woman, give me an irreligious woman! You have no more natural sense of duty than the bottom of the Thames River has of a wooden beam, and just like that beam, some sense needs to be knocked into you.î             

 They argued quietly, until Mr. Cruncher kicked off his clay-covered boots and lied down on the floor. After taking a nervous peek at him lying on his back, with his rust-covered hands under his head for a pillow, Young Jerry lay down too and fell asleep again.              

 There was no fish for breakfast, or much of anything else. Mr. Cruncher was in a bad mood, and he kept an iron pot lid near him in case he saw Mrs. Cruncher saying grace and wanted to throw it at her. He brushed his hair and washed up at the usual time and went off to work with his son.              

 Young Jerry walked with the stool under his arm beside his father. They walked along Fleet Street, which was sunny and crowded. Young Jerry was very different than he had been the night before when he had run away from the coffin through the darkness alone. He was sharp again in the daylight, and his fears had left with the night. Its very possible that other people on Fleet Street and in other parts of London felt the same way that beautiful morning.              

 ìFather,î said Young Jerry as they walked along together. He made sure to keep his father at armís length and to hold the stool between them. ìWhatís a resurrection man?î              

 Mr. Cruncher stopped on the sidewalk before he answered. ìHow should I know?î             

 ìI thought you knew everything, Father,î said Young Jerry pretending unconvincingly.             

 ìHmm. Well,î answered Mr. Cruncher, starting to walk again and taking his hat off to let his spiked hair out. ìHeís a businessman.î             

 ìWhat merchandise does he trade in, Father?î asked the quick Young Jerry.             

 ìHis merchandise,î said Mr. Cruncher after thinking it over, ìis of a scientific kind.î             

 ìPeopleís bodies, isnít it, Father?î asked the boy, excited.             

 ìI think itís something like that,î said Mr. Cruncher.             

 ìOh, Father, I want to be a resurrection man when I grow up!î             

 Mr. Cruncher felt better, but he shook his head in a doubtful and moralizing way. ìThat depends on how you develop your skills. If you work at developing your skills, and you donít say anymore to anybody than you have to, thereís no telling what you might be good at.î Young Jerry was encouraged by this and walked a few yards ahead to place the stool in the shadow of Temple Bar. Mr. Cruncher said to himself, ìJerry, you honest businessman, thereís a chance that the boy will be good luck to you after all and will make up for his mother!î          

 People had started drinking earlier than usual at Monsieur Defargeís wine shop. As early as six oíclock in the morning, sickly faces looking into the shopís barred windows had seen the faces of other people inside, hunched over their wine glasses. Monsieur Defarge sold very weak wine even when things were going well, but nowadays his wine was especially weak. Moreover, his wine tasted sour and made the people who drank it sour and depressed. Monsieur Defargeís wine didnít fire them with a   Bacchanalian Bacchus was the Roman god of wine  Bacchanalian  flame, but instead filled them with a low, intense heat.             

 This was the third morning in a row that the drinking had started early at Monsieur Defargeís wine shop. It started on Monday, and now it was Wednesday. The patrons had been doing more worrying than drinking, for many men had been there listening, whispering, and wandering around since the doors opened who couldnít have afforded to buy a cup of wine if their lives depended on it. These men were as eager to be there as if they could afford entire barrels of wine. They moved from chair to chair, from one corner to the other, eagerly drinking in the conversation in place of wine.             

 Even though there were more people there than usual, Monsieur Defarge was nowhere to be seen. No one missed him, though, and nobody that came into the shop looked for him or asked where he was. No one thought it was strange to see Madame Defarge sitting alone serving wine. She had a bowl in front of her filled with old coins that were as worn and beaten up as the people who had owned them.          

 Apathy and boredom might have been what the spies who stopped into the wine shop saw. The spies stopped in at every place, of the highest or lowest class, from the royal palace to the jail. Card games dragged on, people built towers out of dominoes, and customers drew shapes on the tables with spilled drops of wine. Even Madame Defarge traced the pattern on her sleeve with a toothpick and stared off into the distance.              

 This is how it was in the wine shop in Saint Antoine until the middle of the day. At noon, two men covered in dust came walking through the streets under the swinging streetlamps. One of them was Monsieur Defarge. The other was a man wearing a blue cap who repaired roads. Dusty and thirsty, the two men entered the wine shop. Their arrival had sparked some excitement in Saint Antoine, which spread as they came through town and could be seen in the faces of the townspeople watching them from their doors and windows. No one followed them down the street, however, and no one in the wine shop said anything when they came in, although everyone there was watching them.              

 ìGood day, gentlemen!î said Monsieur Defarge.             

 Saying this may have been a signal to let everyone know they could speak. Together everyone answered, ìGood day!î             

 ìThe weather is bad, gentlemen,î said Defarge, shaking his head.             

 When he said this, all the men looked at each other, then they looked at the ground and sat in silence. Except for one man, who got up and left.              

 ìMy wife,î said Defarge out loud, speaking to Madame Defarge. ìI have traveled some distance with this repairer of roads named Jacques. I met him by chance a day and halfís travel outside of Paris. He is a good kid, this repairer of roads named Jacques. Give him a drink, my wife!î             

 Another man got up and left. Madame Defarge put a glass of wine in front of the repairer of roads named Jacques. He tipped his blue cap to everyone and drank. In his shirt he had some rough, dark bread. He ate from it now and again and sat eating and drinking at Madame Defargeís counter. A third man got up and left.             

 Monsieur Defarge refreshed himself with a cup of wine. He took less than was given to the stranger, since wine was something that was always available to him. He stood waiting until Jacques had finished his breakfast. Monsieur Defarge didnít look directly at anyone there, and no one looked at him, not even his wife, who was now busy knitting.              

 ìHave you finished your meal, my friend?î asked Monsieur Defarge after a while.             

 ìYes, thank you.î             

 ìCome on, then! Iíll show you the apartment I said you could stay in. Itís perfect for you.î             

 They left the wine shop and went out into the street, then into a courtyard, up a steep staircase, and up into an attic. This was the same attic where Dr. Manette once sat on a bench, stooped over, busily making shoes.              

 Dr. Manette wasnít there anymore. Instead, the three men who had left the wine shop one by one were all there. Between these men and Dr. Manette there was one small connection, though, for the men had all once watched him through the holes in these walls.             

 Defarge carefully closed the door and said quietly:              

 ìJacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques Three! This is the witness that I, Jacques Four, went to meet. He will tell you everything. Tell them, Jacques Five!î             

 The repairer of roads wiped his dark brow with his blue cap and said, ìWhere should I begin, monsieur?î             

 ìBegin at the beginning,î was Monsieur Defargeís sensible reply.              

 ìI saw a man, messieurs,î said the repairer of roads, ìa year ago this summer, hiding under the marquisís carriage, hanging by a chain. Listen to how it happened. I had just finished working on a road and was leaving. The sun was setting, and the marquisís carriage was slowly climbing up a hill and the man was hanging beneath it by a chainólike this.î             

 The repairer of roads acted it all out again. He ought to have perfected his act by then, since he had been entertaining his village with it for the whole year.             

 Jacques One jumped in and asked if he had ever seen the man before.              

 ìNever,î answered the repairer of roads, standing up straight again.              

 Jacques Three wanted to know how he was able to recognize him if he had never seen him before.             

 ìHe was very tall,î said the repairer of roads quietly, with his finger on his nose. ìWhen the marquis asked me that night what the man looked like, I answered, ìAs tall as a ghost.î             

 ìYou should have said as short as a dwarf,î answered Jacques Two.              

 ìBut how was I to know? The deed hadnít been committed yet. And the man didnít tell me what he was going to do. Look! Even then, I didnít offer up my statement. The marquis pointed me out with his finger while I was standing near our little fountain. He says, ëBring that rascal to me!í On my word, messieurs, I didnít offer up any information.î             

 ìHeís right there, Jacques,î mumbled Defarge to the man who had interrupted. ìGo on!î             

 ìGood!î said the repairer of roads mysteriously. ìThe tall man disappeared. Theyíve been looking for him for how many months? Nine? Ten? Eleven?î             

 ìThe number of months doesnít matter,î said Defarge. ìHe is well hidden, but unfortunately heís finally been found. Go on!î             

 ìOnce again I was working up on the hillside and the sun was about to set. I was collecting my tools to go back to my cottage in the village below where it was already dark. I looked up and I saw six soldiers coming over the hill. In the middle of them was a tall man, and his arms were tied to his sidesólike this!î             

 With the help of his cap, he showed them how the man had his elbows bound to his sides with a rope that was tied behind him.              

 ìI stood there, messieurs, by my pile of stones, and watched the soldiers and their prisoner walk past. The road is isolated so anything that happens there is worth watching. At first, as they got closer, I didnít notice anything besides the fact that they were six soldiers with a tall man who was tied up. They were silhouetted against the sun, so they appeared only as black outlines, except on the side the sun was setting on, where they were edged in red, messieurs. Also, I could see their shadows on the hollow ridge on the other side of the road and on the hill above it. Their shadows were long and looked like the shadows of giants. Also, I saw that they were covered in dust and that they were kicking up dust as they walked closer. But when they got very close to me I recognized the tall man and he recognized me. Oh, he would have been happy to jump over the hillside again the way he had the night when he and I first met, close to that same place!î             

 He described it as if he were there, and it was obvious that he saw it all clearly. Perhaps he hadnít seen much else excitement in his life.              

 ìI didnít let the soldiers see that I recognized the tall man, and he didnít let them see that he recognized me. We did all of it with our eyes. ëCome on!í said the leader of the group, pointing to the village. ëBring him quickly to his grave!í At that, they started walking faster. I followed. His arms were swollen from being tied up so tightly, and his wooden shoes were large and awkward. He was limping, walking slowly because of this, and the soldiers were prodding him forward with their gunsólike this!î             

 He showed them how the man was pushed forward by the butt ends of the muskets.             

 ìAs they went down the hill like mad men running a race, the tall man fell. The soldiers laughed and picked him up again. His face was bleeding and covered with dust, but he couldnít touch it. So they laughed at him again. They brought him to the village, and all the villagers came running to look at him. The soldiers took him past the mill and up to the prison. All the villagers watched the prison gate open in the darkness of the night and the tall man go inside. It looked like the prison gate swallowed himólike this!î             

 He opened his mouth wide and then shut it quickly, making a snapping sound with his teeth. Seeing that the man didnít want to ruin the effect by opening his mouth again, Defarge said, ìGo on, Jacques.î             

 ìAll of the villagers left,î continued the repairer of roads. He was on his tiptoes and speaking quietly. ìAll of them whispered by the fountain. All of them went to sleep. All of them dreamed of the poor man, locked up behind bars in the prison on the hill, and never to come out again except to be executed. In the morning, carrying my tools on my shoulder, eating a bit of black bread as I went, I walked by the prison on my way to work. I saw him there, high up, behind the bars of an iron cage. He was looking out, covered in blood and dust, as he was the night before. His hands werenít free so he couldnít wave to me, and I was afraid to call out to him. He looked at me like he were already dead.î             

 Defarge and the three men looked at one another. Their looks were angry and hate filled as they listened to the manís story. Although they were secretive, they all had a commanding presence. They looked like three judges. Jacques One and Two were sitting on an old pallet bed, and they both had their chins on their hands and their eyes focused closely on the repairer of roads. Jacques Three, equally focused on the man, was on one knee behind them. He kept running his hand over his mouth and nose. Defarge was standing between them and the man telling the story, whom he had placed in the light of the window. He kept looking back and forth from the repairer of roads to the other men.             

 ìGo on, Jacques,î said Defarge.              

 ìHe was up in his iron cage for several days. The villagers looked at him secretly, for they were all afraid, but they kept looking up at him from far away. At night, when everyone had finished working for the day and had gathered to gossip at the fountain, everyone would look at the prison. Before, everyone faced the posting house. Now, they faced the prison. They would whisper at the fountain that although the man had been sentenced to death, he would not be killed. They would say that a petition had been presented in Paris that proved that he had been driven insane by the death of his child. They say that a petition had been presented to the king himself. What do I know? Itís possible. Maybe yes, maybe no.î             

 ìListen then, Jacques,î Jacques One interrupted sternly. ìKnow that a petition was presented to the king and queen. Everyone here, except you, saw the king take it while he was in his carriage in the street, sitting next to the queen. It was Defarge, this man here, who, risking his life, ran out in front of the horses with the petition in his hand.î             

 ìAnd listen again, Jacques,î said Jacques Three, who was kneeling down. He kept running his fingers over his face in a noticeably greedy way, as if hungry for something besides food and drink. ìThe guards, on horse and on foot, surrounded Defarge as he presented the petition and beat him. Understand?î             

 ìI understand, messieurs.î             

 ìGo on then,î said Defarge.             

 ìOn the other hand, there are also rumors at the fountain,î continued the man, ìthat he has been brought down here to be executed right away and that he will definitely be killed. There are even rumors that because he killed a marquis who ruled over his   serfs a farmer who cultivated land owned by someone else and who was bought and sold with the land  serfs , he is like a father to his serfs and the tall man will be executed for   parricide killing a parent  parricide . One old man at the fountain said that his right hand, holding a knife, will be burned off in front of his eyes. He said theyíd make wounds in his arms, chest, and legs and pour boiling oil, melted lead, hot resin, wax, and sulfur into them. Finally, they will tear his arms and legs off by four strong horses. The old man said that all of this was actually done to a prisoner who tried to assassinate the last king, Louis the Fifteenth. But how should I know if heís telling the truth? Iím not a scholar.î             

 ìListen once again then, Jacques!î said the man who kept touching his face greedily with his hand. ìThe name of that prisoner was Damiens. It was all done in broad daylight, publicly, in the streets of Paris. Nothing was more noticed in the large crowd that saw it than the group of upper-class ladies who were eager and excited to see the whole thing through to the very end. To the very end, Jacques, which didnít happen until nighttime, when he had lost two legs and an arm but was still breathing. And it was doneówait, how old are you?î             

 ìIím thirty-five,î said the repairer of roads, who looked sixty.              

 ìIt was done when you were over ten years old. Maybe you saw it.î             

 ìEnough!î said Defarge impatiently. ìLong live the devil! Continue.î             

 ìWell! Some say this and some say that. They donít talk about anything else. Even the fountain seems to be whispering about it. After a while, on a Sunday night when all the villagers were asleep, some soldiers came down from the prison. You could hear their guns tapping on the street as they marched. Workmen dug and hammered, and soldiers laughed and sang. In the morning, there was a gallows built forty feet high near the fountain.î              

 The repairer of roads seemed to look through the ceiling. He pointed as if he could see the gallows off in the sky.             

 ìEveryone stopped working and gathered there. Nobody took the cows out. The cows were there with everyone else. At midday there was a drum roll. Soldiers had marched into the prison at night, and the tall man was now with the soldiers. Heís tied up like he was before, and there was a gag in his mouth, tied with a tight string that made him look like he was laughing.î The man showed them what he looked like by putting his thumbs in the corners of his mouth and pulling them back toward his ears. ìOn the top of the gallows they had attached the knife that killed the marquis. The blade was pointing up toward the air. They hanged him there forty feet in the air, and his body is still hanging, poisoning the water of the fountain.î             

 The men all looked at each other. The man had started sweating while he told the story, and he used his blue cap to wipe his face.              

 ìItís terrible, messieurs. How can women and children fetch water from the fountain? Who can gather and gossip there now that a man has been killed there? When I left the village Monday evening, as the sun was setting, I looked back from the hill and the shadow of the man hanging from the gallows fell across the church, the mill, and the prison. It seemed to fall across the whole world, messieurs!î             

 The greedy man chewed on one of his fingers as he looked at the other three, and his finger shook with a hunger for something other than food.              

 ìThatís all, messieurs. I left at sunset as I had been told to do, and I walked the rest of the night and half of the next day until I met this man here, as I was told. I came with him, sometimes riding a horse and sometimes walking, through the rest of yesterday and last night. And here I am!î             

 After a gloomy silence, Jacques One said, ìGood! You have done the right thing and have told your story well. Will you wait for us a little while outside?î             

 ìOf course,î said the repairer of roads. Defarge brought him to the top of the stairs, left him sitting there, and came back.              

 The three men had gotten up and were standing together when Defarge came back into the attic.             

 ìWhat do you say, Jacques?î asked Jacques One. ìShould we put them on the list?î             

 ìTo be put on the list and destroyed,î answered Defarge.              

 ìWonderful!î said the greedy man.             

 ìThe chateau and the whole family?î asked Jacques One.             

 ìThe chateau and the whole family,î answered Defarge. ìExtermination.î             

 The hungry man said ìWonderful!î again and began chewing another finger.          

 ìAre you sure,î Jacques asked Defarge, ìthat no embarrassment can come from our way of keeping the list? Iím sure itís safe, since no one but us can decode it. But will we always be able to decode it? Or, I should say, will     she?î             

 ìJacques,î answered Defarge standing up straight, ìeven if my wife took on the job of keeping the list only in her memory, she wouldnít forget a word of it! Not a single syllable. She has knitted it herself in her own code, and it will always be as clear to her as the sun. You can trust Madame Defarge. It would be easier for the weakest coward to take his own life than it would be to erase one letter of his name or crimes from the list that Madame Defarge is knitting.î             

 The men all mumbled approvingly. Then the hungry man asked, ìAre we going to send the repairer of roads back home soon? I hope so. He isnít very smart. Isnít he a bit dangerous?î             

 ìHe doesnít know anything,î said Defarge. ìAt least nothing more than what would get him hanged, too. Iíll take responsibility for him. Let him stay with me. Iíll take care of him and then send him on his way. He wants to see the world of the upper classes: the king, the queen, and the court. Let him see them on Sunday.î             

 ìWhat?î shouted the hungry man, staring at him. ìIsnít it a bad sign that he wants to see royalty and nobility?î             

 ìJacques,î said Defarge. ìShow a cat just a little bit of milk if you want it to thirst for it. Show a dog his natural prey if you want it to hunt it one day.î             

 They didnít say anything else. They found the repairer of roads asleep on the top stair and told him to lie down on the pallet bed and rest. He didnít need to be persuaded and was soon fast asleep.              

 Worse places than Defargeís wine shop could easily be found in Paris for an unsophisticated peasant like him. Except for a mysterious fear of Madame Defarge that bothered him constantly, his life was new and exciting. But Madame Defarge sat at the counter all day, ignoring him and determined not to show that his being had any connection to a secret plan. He trembled in his wooden shoes whenever he looked at her and told himself that it was impossible to know what the lady might pretend next. He was sure that if she decided to pretend that she had seen him kill someone and then skin the victim afterward, she would continue with the idea until he had been convicted of murder.             

 Therefore, when Sunday came, the repairer of roads was not happy, although he claimed he was, to find out that Madame Defarge was to go with Defarge and himself to Versailles. It was additionally worrisome to have Madame Defarge knitting the whole way there on public transportation. It was also worrisome to have her in the crowd that afternoon still holding her knitting in her hands as the crowd waited to see the carriage of the king and queen.              

 ìYou work hard, madame,î said the man next to her in the crowd.             

 ìYes,î answered Madame Defarge. ìI have a lot of work to do.î             

 ìWhat do you make, madame?î             

 ìMany things.î             

 ìSuch as? ì             

 ìSuch as   shrouds a cloth that a corpse is wrapped in before burial  shrouds ,î answered Madame Defarge calmly.              

 The man moved a little further away from her as soon as he could. The repairer of roads fanned himself with his blue cap. He felt hot and uncomfortable from what she had said. If he needed the king and queen to restore him, he soon got his cure. Soon the large-faced king and beautiful queen came by in their golden coach. They were waited on by a group of fancily dressed ladies and lords who were laughing. The repairer of roads looked on in awe at the men and women in jewels and silks, wearing makeup on their handsome and haughty faces and dressed elegantly. He was so caught up for a moment that he yelled, ìLong live the king! Long live the queen! Long live everybody and everything!î as if he had never met the three men named Jacques. Then they saw the gardens, the courtyards, terraces, fountains, and green hills of the court. They saw more of the king and queen. They saw more lords and ladies. There was more cheering for all of them until he was so moved by it all that he started to cry. During this scene, which lasted about three hours, there were many other people there with him who were also cheering and crying. Through all of this, Defarge held him by the collar as if he might become so overwhelmed that he would charge at them all and rip them to pieces.              

 ìBravo!î said Defarge. He gave him a fatherly pat on the back when it was all over. ìYouíre a good boy!î he said.              

 The repairer of roads was now regaining his senses. He worried that he had done something wrong by behaving the way he had, but he had not.             

 ìYou are the man we want,î said Defarge in his ear. ìYou make these fools think that this will all go on forever. That makes them more disrespectful and will end this all that much sooner.î             

 ìHey!î yelled the repairer of roads, thinking about what he said. ìThatís true.î             

 ìThese fools know nothing. They hate your very breath and wish they could end your life, your life or a hundred like it rather than harm one of their own horses or dogs. But they only know what you or people like you tell them. Keep fooling them then, a bit longer. It canít fool them too much.î             

 Madame Defarge looked at him arrogantly and nodded in agreement.             

 ìAs far as youíre concerned,î she said, ìyou would cheer and cry for anything that made an impressive show and a lot of sound. Wouldnít you?î             

 ìHonestly, madame, I think so. At least for the moment.î             

 ìIf you were shown a big pile of dolls and were told to pull them apart and steal parts of them to take for yourself, you would pick out the richest and most colorful. Wouldnít you?î             

 ìHonestly, madame, yes.î             

 ìYes. And if you were shown a flock of birds that couldnít fly and were told to pluck off their feathers and take for them yourself, you would go after the birds with the prettiest feathers, wouldnít you?î             

 ìItís true, madame.î             

 ìYouíve seen both dolls and birds today,î said Madame Defarge with a wave of her hand toward where the king and queen and their attendants had been seen. ìNow go home!î             

 Madame Defarge and her husband were glad to go back to their home in Saint Antoine. The man in the blue cap made his way through the darkness and the dust down the many miles of road, slowly making his way toward the place where the dead marquisís chateau sat among the trees. The stone faces on the chateau had lots of time now for listening to the wind rustle through the trees and the water in the fountain. The few poor peasants who came within sight of the large stone courtyard and terrace staircase looking for herbs to eat or small bits of firewood had thought in their hungry delirium that the expressions on the faces had changed. A faint rumor spread in the village that when the knife plunged into the marquisís body the faces on the stone figures changed from expressions of pride to expressions of anger and pain. Also, when the tall man was hanged forty feet above the fountain the stone faces were said to have changed again to look like they had been avenged. They would keep these expressions forever. In the stone face over the large window of the bedroom where the marquis was killed, there were two small dents in the sculptureís nose. Everybody noticed them and no one remembered having seen them there before. A few times, two or three ragged peasants would come out from the crowd to take a quick peek at the stone face that looked like the marquis. No one would point to it for more than a minute before everyone would run off into the trees like rabbits, though the actual rabbits were luckier as they could find enough to eat.              

 The chateau and the hut, the stone face and the hanged man, the red stain on the stone floor and the pure water in the village well, thousands of acres of land, a whole province of France, even all of France, and everything under the night skyóall are just a line as thin as a hair on the timeline of man. Our whole world and all the events that take place on it, both big and little, pass in the twinkling of a star. And just as human knowledge can split a ray of light and analyze what itís made of, so more intelligent beings might be able to analyze all of the thoughts, deeds, vices, and virtues of every human being on earth.              

 Monsieur and Madame Defarge came moving along slowly in the darkness in the public vehicle, to the gate of Paris, which lay in the path to their destination. They were stopped at the barrier guardhouse, as usual. Soldiers with lanterns came toward them to ask questions, and Monsieur Defarge got down from the vehicle since he knew one or two of the soldiers and one of the policemen. He knew the policeman well and embraced him.              

 When they had reached Saint Antoine again that night, they finally got down near the edge of the town. As they walked through the black mud and garbage in the streets ,Madame Defarge spoke to her husband:             

 ìSay then, my friend. What did Jacques the policeman tell you?î             

 ìHe told me all he knows, which isnít much tonight. Thereís been another spy hired for our neighborhood. There might be many more, for all he knows, but he knows of one for sure.î             

 ìOh, well!î said Madame Defarge, raising her eyebrows in a calm, businesslike manner. ìWeíll need to put him on the list. What do they call him?î             

 ìHeís English.î             

 ìEven better. Whatís his name?î             

 ìBarsad,î said Defarge, using the French pronunciation. But he had been so careful to get the name right that he said it perfectly.             

 ìBarsad,î repeated Madame Defarge. ìGood. Whatís his first name?î             

 ìJohn.î             

 ìJohn Barsad,î repeated Madame Defarge after repeating it to herself. ìGood. What does he look like, does anyone know?î             

 ìHeís about forty years old. Heís about five feet nine inches tall. He has black hair and a dark complexion. Heís generally handsome. He has dark eyes; a long, thin, yellow face, and he has a hooked nose that curves toward his left cheek, which gives him a mean look.î              

 ìMy goodness. Itís a portrait!î said Madame Defarge, laughing. ìIíll put him on the list tomorrow.î             

 They went into the wine shop, which was closed because it was midnight. Madame Defarge immediately took her place at her desk and counted the small amount of money the shop had earned while they were gone. She inspected the stock, looked through the entries in the book, made some entries herself, inspected the bartender in every way possible, and finally sent him off to bed. Then she poured out the coins in the money bowl again and began to tie them up in a handkerchief. She tied them up in a line of separate knots to keep them from being stolen during the night. All this time Defarge had his pipe in his mouth and was pacing up and down, admiring her work but staying out of her way. This is the way he handled all of their business and personal affairs in life.          

 It was a hot night, and the shop was in a filthy area of town and smelled bad. Monsieur Defargeís sense of smell wasnít delicate at all, but the wine stock seemed to smell much stronger than it had ever tasted, as did the rum, brandy, and   anise a licorice-flavored liqueur  anise . He waved the combination of scents away as he finished his pipe and put it down.              

 ìYouíre tired,î said Madame Defarge, looking up as she tied the coins into the handkerchief. ìThey are only the usual smells.î             

 ìIím a little tired,î her husband admitted.             

 ìYouíre a little depressed too,î said Madame Defarge, who was never so focused on the shopís business that she didnít notice how her husband was doing. ìOh, men, men!î             

 ìBut, my dear!î Defarge began.             

 ìëBut, my dear!íî Madame Defarge repeated, nodding at him. ìBut, my dear! You are depressed tonight, my dear!î             

 ìWell, then,î said Defarge, as if she had wrung the thought out of him. ìIt     is a long time.î             

 ìIt is a long time,î repeated his wife, ì and when isnít it a long time? Revenge takes a long time. Itís just the way it is.î             

 ìIt doesnít take a long time for a man to be struck by lightning,î said Defarge.             

 ìHow long,î asked Madame Defarge calmly, ìdoes it take to make and store the lightning? Tell me.î             

 Defarge looked up thoughtfully, as if there were some sense in what she had said.              

 ìIt doesnít take a long time,î said Madame Defarge, ìfor an earthquake to destroy a town. Well! Tell me, how long does it take to create an earthquake?î             

 ìA long time, I suppose,î said Defarge.              

 ìBut when it is ready, it takes place and destroys everything in its path. In the meantime, it is always growing, although no one sees or hears it. Take comfort in that.î             

 She tied a coin into a knot with a fierce look in her eyes, as if she were strangling an enemy.             

 ìI tell you,î said Madame Defarge, reaching out her right hand for emphasis, ì that although it is taking a long time, it is on its way. I tell you that revenge never turns back and never stops. I tell you that it is always moving forward. Look around and think about the lives of all the people we know. Consider the faces, the rage and unhappiness, that the group of Jacques comes closer to addressing every hour. Can such things last? Bah! Youíre being ridiculous.î             

 ìMy brave wife,î answered Defarge, standing in front of her with his head bent down a little. His hands were clasped behind his back, like a submissive student in front of his Sunday-school teacher, ìI donít doubt any of what you are saying. But itís lasted a long time. Itís possibleóyou know well that it isóthat change might not come during our lifetimes.î             

 ìAnd so what?î asked Madame Defarge, tying another knot as if she were strangling another enemy.              

 ìWell!î said Defarge, with a shrug. ìWe shall not see victory.î             

 ìWe will have helped to cause it,î answered Madame Defarge, waiving her hand for emphasis. ìNothing that we do is wasted. I believe with all of my soul that we shall see victory. But even if we donít, even if I knew that we would not, show me the neck of an aristocrat who is a tyrant and I wouldóî             

 Then Madame Defarge, clenching her teeth, violently tied another knot in the handkerchief.             

 ìHold on!î yelled Defarge. He blushed a little, as if he felt she were calling him a coward. ìI too, my dear, will stop at nothing.î             

 ìYes! But it is your weakness that sometimes you need to see your victim and an opportunity in front of you to keep you going. You need to stay focused without that. When the time comes, let yourself go like a tiger and a devil. But until then, keep yourself in checkóalways ready to pounce, but hidden where no one can see.î             

 Madame punctuated the end of this sentence by hitting the little counter with her chain of money as if she were beating the counterís brains out. Then she gathered the heavy handkerchief under her arm calmly and told him that it was time to go to bed.              

 At noon the next day, Madame Defarge was at her usual place in the wine shop, knitting busily. There was a rose beside her, and she glanced at it now and then, but with her usual preoccupied appearance. There were a few customers there. Some were drinking and some were not. Some were standing and some were sitting or hanging around. It was a very hot day, and lots of flies were investigating the sticky little wine glasses near Madame Defarge and dropping dead at the bottoms. The other flies werenít bothered by seeing the dead flies. They looked at them indifferently, as if they themselves were elephants or something else completely unrelated to them, until they too ended up dead. Itís strange to think how oblivious flies are! Perhaps the lords and ladies at the royal court were thinking just as much that sunny summer day.              

 A person coming in through the door of the wine shop cast his shadow on Madame Defarge, and Madame Defarge felt it was someone she didnít know. She put down her knitting and started to pin her rose to her hat before she looked at the stranger.              

 It was strange. The moment Madame Defarge picked up the rose, all of the customers stopped talking and gradually left the wine shop.              

 ìGood day, madame,î said the newcomer.             

 ìGood day, monsieur,î answered Madame Defarge.             

 She said the last words out loud, and to herself she added, ìHa! Good day to you, about forty years old, about five feet nine inches tall with black hair, a handsome appearance, a dark complexion, dark eyes, and long, thin, yellow face with a hooked nose that leans toward the left cheek, giving you a mean look! Good day!î             

 ìWould you be kind enough to give me a little glass of aged cognac and a drink of cool, fresh water, madame?î             

 Madame Defarge politely gave him what he asked.              

 ìThis cognac is marvelous, madame!î             

 It was the first time anyone had complimented her cognac, and she knew enough about where it came from to know it was not good cognac. She said, however, that the cognac was flattered by his comment and she resumed her knitting. The visitor watched her fingers for a few moments and then looked around the wine shop.              

 ìYouíre very good at knitting, madame.î             

 ìI am used to it.î             

 ìItís a very pretty pattern too.î             

 ìYou think so?î she said, smiling at him.              

 ìDefinitely. Can I ask what itís for?î             

 ìItís just a hobby,î said Madame Defarge, still smiling at him while her fingers worked quickly.              

 ìItís not for a particular use?î             

 ìThat depends. I may find a use for it someday. If I do, wellÖ,î said Madame Defarge. She took a breath and nodded in almost a flirtatious way, ìthen Iíll use it.î             

 It was amazing that the people of Saint Antoine seemed to hate the rose on Madame Defargeís headband. Two men had come into the wine shop separately and had been about to order a drink. When they saw the rose they stuttered and pretended they were looking for a friend who wasnít there, then they left. Of all the people who had been there when the visitor had come in, not one of them was still there. They had all gone. The spy had been watching but hadnít noticed the sign. They had all wandered off in a poor, casual way that looked perfectly normal and innocent.              

 ìJohn,î Madame Defarge thought as she knit the name into her list and kept looking at the stranger. ìIf you stay long enough I will have knit     ëBarsadí before youíve left.î             

 ìDo you have a husband, madame?î             

 ìI do.î             

 ìChildren?î             

 ìNo children.î             

 ìBusiness seems bad.î             

 ìBusiness is very bad. All the people are poor.î             

 ìAh, those poor, unlucky people! So oppressed too, like you say.î             

 ìAs you say,î Madame Defarge said, correcting him. She skillfully knit something extra into his name that promised him nothing good.          

 ìExcuse me. Of course it was I who said so, but of course you think so too.î             

 ìI think so?î answered Madame Defarge in a high voice. ìMy husband and I are busy enough keeping this wine shop open. We donít have time to think. All we think about here is how to survive. That is the subject     we think about, and it gives us enough to think about from morning to night, without worrying about other people. I? Think for other people? No, no.î             

 The spy was there to find any little bits of information he could. He didnít allow his confusion to show on his face. Instead he stood there looking like he just wanted to gossip casually. He leaned his elbow on Madame Defargeís little counter, occasionally sipping his cognac.              

 ìGaspardís execution is a shame, madame. Ah! Poor Gaspard!î he sighed sympathetically.             

 ìMy faith!î answered Madame Defarge, casually. ìIf people stab other people with knives, they need to pay for it. He knew beforehand what the punishment would be. He has paid the price for his crime.î             

 ìI believe,î whispered the spy, looking conspiratorial, ìI believe there is a lot of sympathy and anger for the poor man in this neighborhood, isnít there? Between you and me?î             

 ìIs there?î asked Madame Defarge innocently.             

 ìIsnít there?î             

 ìHere is my husband!î said Madame Defarge.              

 As Monsieur Defarge came through the door of the wine shop, the spy saluted him by touching his hat and said with a smile, ìGood day, Jacques!î Defarge stopped walking and stared at him.              

 ìGood day, Jacques!î repeated the spy. He didnít speak quite as confidently or smile quite as easily this time.              

 ìYou are confused, monsieur,î answered the owner of the wine shop. ìYou must have confused me for someone else. Thatís not my name. I am Ernest Defarge.î             

 ìWhatever,î said the spy lightheartedly, but a bit uneasily too. ìGood day!î             

 ìGood day!î answered Defarge, coldly.             

 ìI was telling your wife, whom I had the pleasure of chatting with when you entered, that I hear there is a lot of sympathy and anger in Saint Antoine about the execution of poor Gaspard.î             

 ìNo one has told me that,î said Defarge, shaking his head. ìI know nothing about it.î             

 After he said this he walked behind the little counter and stood with his hand on the back of his wifeís chair. He looked over his wife at the spy, whom either of them would have shot him with the greatest satisfaction.              

 The spy, accustomed to his job, didnít change his casual attitude. He finished his little glass of cognac and took a sip of water. He asked for another glass of cognac, and Madame Defarge poured it for him and went back to her knitting. She hummed a little song while she knit.              

 ìYou seem to know this quarter well. I mean, even better than I do,î observed Defarge.              

 ìNot at all, but I hope to get to know it better. I am extremely interested in the unfortunate people who live here.î             

 ìHah!î Defarge muttered.              

 ìThe joy of talking with you, Monsieur Defarge, reminds me,î continued the spy, ìthat I am lucky enough to know some things about you.î             

 ìReally!î said Defarge, indifferently.             

 ìYes, really. I know that when Dr. Manette was released from prison, you, his old servant, took care of him. He was brought to you. You see that I know about the situation?î             

 ìThatís true, for sure,î said Defarge. His wife let him know by brushing her elbow against him as she knitted and sang that he should answer, but only as briefly as possible.              

 ìHis daughter came to you,î said the spy. ìAnd she took Dr. Manette from you, along with a well-dressed man in brown. What is his name? He had a little wig. Lorry! From Tellson and Company over in England.î             

 ìThatís true,î repeated Defarge.              

 ìVery interesting memories!î said the spy. ìI have known Dr. Manette and his daughter in England.î             

 ìYes?î said Defarge.              

 ìYou donít hear from them much now?î asked the spy.              

 ìNo,î said Defarge.              

 ìActually,î Madame Defarge added, looking up from her knitting and her little song, ìwe never hear from them. We got the news that they arrived safely in England, and perhaps another letter or two from them, maybe two. But since then, they have gone their way, we have gone ours, and we havenít kept in touch.î             

 ìGood, madame,î answered the spy. ìShe is going to be married.î             

 ìGoing to be?î repeated Madame Defarge. ìShe was attractive enough to have gotten married a long time ago. You English are cold people, it seems to me.î             

 ìOh! You can tell that I am English.î             

 ìYou have an English accent,î answered Madame Defarge. ìTherefore I assume that you are an Englishman.î             

 He didnít take this as a compliment, but he made the best of it and laughed it off. After finishing his cognac, he added:             

 ìYes, Miss Manette is going to be married. But not to an Englishman. Sheís marrying someone who, like herself, is French. And speaking of poor Gaspard, it is strange that she is going to marry the nephew of the marquis, who Gaspard was hanged for killing. In other words, she is marrying the new marquis. But he lives in England where no one knows who he is. He isnít a marquis there. There he is known as Mr. Charles Darnay. DíAulnais is the name of his motherís side of the family.î             

 Madame Defarge kept knitting, but her husband was obviously affected by the news. He struck a match and lit his pipe behind the counter, but he couldnít hide the fact that he was troubled by the news. His hand was shaking. The man would have been a terrible spy if he hadnít noticed it or made of note of it to himself.              

 No other customers were coming in that Mr. Barsad could get information from. So having seen at least this one suspicious sign, whatever it might end up being worth to him, he paid for his drinks and left. Before he went he said in a friendly way that he looked forward to seeing Monsieur and Madame Defarge again. For several minutes after he had gone out into the streets of Saint Antoine, the husband and wife stayed exactly the way they had been in case him came back in.             

 ìCan what he said about Mademoiselle Manette be true?î asked Defarge quietly. He looked down at his wife, smoking his pipe with one hand and putting the other on the back of her chair.              

 ìSince heís the one who said it, itís probably false,î answered Madame Defarge, raising her eyebrows a little. ìBut it might be true.î             

 ìIf it isóî Defarge started to say, then stopped.              

 ìIf it is?î repeated his wife.             

 ìóAnd if the revolution comes while we are still alive, I hope for her sake that destiny keeps her husband out of France.î             

 ìHer husbandís destiny,î said Madame Defarge, as calmly as usual, ìwill take him where he is meant to go and to the end that he is meant for. Thatís all I know.î             

 ìBut itís very strange, isnít it?î said Defarge. He was almost begging his wife to admit it. ìAfter all weíve done for her father and herself, that her husbandís name should be on the list you are knitting, next to that spy who just left us.î             

 ìStranger things than this will happen when the revolution does come,î answered Madame Defarge. ìI have them both here on my list, for sure. And they are both here for what they have done. That is enough.î             

 She rolled up her knitting when she said this, then took the rose out of the handkerchief that was wrapped around her head. Either the people of Saint Antoine knew instinctively that she had taken out the rose or the people of Saint Antoine were watching for it to be removed. Either way, people soon came wandering into the wine shop and things in the wine shop went back to normal.          

 In the evening, when the residents of Saint Antoine come outside, people sat on doorsteps and window ledges. They stood on the corners of dirty streets and courtyards for a breath of fresh air. Madame Defarge, with her knitting in her hand, would go from place to place and from one group of people to the other. She was like a   missionary a member of a religion who tries to convert other people  missionary , and there were many others like herótypes that the world will be lucky never to have again. All the women knitted. They knitted worthless things, but it was busywork to take their minds off eating and drinking. They kept their hands busy instead of their jaws and their stomachs. If they hadnít kept their fingers busy with knitting they would have been that much more aware of how hungry they were.              

 But as they worked their fingers, their eyes and minds worked hard. And as Madame Defarge moved from group to group, her fingers, eyes, and thoughts got quicker and angrier with every group of women she stopped by to visit with.          

 Monsieur Defarge stood smoking in his doorway. He watched her admiringly. ìSheís a great woman,î he said. ìA strong, magnificent woman!î             

 Night came. The church bells rang, and the beating of soldierís drums in the Palace Courtyard could be heard. The women sat knitting in the darkness. Another darkness was closing in for sure when the church bells, which were ringing pleasantly in the tall church steeples all over France, would be melted down to make cannons. When the military drums would be beating to drown out the voice of the peasants, which that night was as strong as the voices of Power, Plenty, Freedom, and Life. Darkness was closing in around the women who sat there knitting. Soon there would be a structure built in that same spot, where these women would one day sit knitting and counting the number of heads that were to be chopped off.             

 There was never a more glorious sunset on the quiet street corner in Soho than one night when Doctor Manette and Lucie sat under the plane tree together. The moon never rose with a gentler glow over London than on that night when it rose as they were still sitting under the tree, and shined through its leaves onto their faces.              

 Lucie was to be married the next day. She had saved this last night for her father, and they sat alone together under the plane tree.             

 ìAre you happy, father?î             

 ìVery happy, my child.î             

 They hadnít said much, though they had been there a long time. When it was still light enough to work and read, she hadnít done her work or read to him as she usually did. Many times she had done both as she sat beside him under the tree. But tonight was different than all others, and nothing could change that.          

 ìIím very happy tonight, too, father. The love that Heaven has blessed me withómy love for Charles, and Charlesís love for meó has made me very happy. But, if my life wasnít still dedicated to you, or if my marriage pulled us apart, even by the distance of only a few streets, I would be more unhappy and disappointed in myself than I could tell you. Even as it isóî             

 Her voice quivered.             

 She embraced him in the moonlight and buried her face in his chest. The moonlight is always sad, as is sunlight and human life itself, when it is coming or going.             

 ìDear father! Can you tell me one last time that you are absolutely sure that no new feelings of mine, or responsibilities, will ever come between us? I am sure of it, but are you? Do you feel sure about it in your heart?î             

 Her father answered with a cheer and certainty he couldnít have faked, ìQuite sure, my darling! More sure than that!î he added, kissing her tenderly. ìMy future is much brighter, Lucie, now that you are getting married, than it could have been without it, or than it ever was before.î             

 ìI hope that is true, father.î             

 ìBelieve it, my love! It is true. Think of how natural and easy it is, my dear, for it to be that way. You, loyal and young, cannot understand how worried I have been that your life would be wastedó î             

 She raised her hand to his lips to stop him from speaking, but he took hold of it and repeated the word.             

 ìówasted, my child. That it should not be wasted. That you would abandon the natural course of your life to take care of me. You are so unselfish that you canít grasp how much I have worried about this. But, only ask yourself, how could I be completely happy if you were not?î             

 ìIf I had never met Charles, father, I would have been happy being with you.î             

 He smiled at her unconscious admission that she would have been unhappy without Charles once she had seen him. He answered:             

 ìYou did see him, my child. Charles is the man you love. If it hadnít been Charles, it would have been someone else. Or, if it hadnít been someone else, it would have been my fault. Then my unhappy past would have spread beyond myself and would have made you unhappy too.î             

 It was the first time since the trial that she had ever heard him mention his unhappy past. His words made her feel strange in a way she had never felt before. She remembered the feeling for a long time afterwards.              

 ìSee!î said Doctor Manette, raising his hand toward the moon. ìI have looked at the moon from my prison window when it was painful to look at. I have looked at it when it was such torture to think of the moon shining on all that I had lost that I beat my head against my cell walls. I have looked at the moon when I was so tired and depressed that I thought about nothing accept how many lines I could draw up and down and across it.î He added to himself as he looked at the moon, ìit was twenty either direction, I remember, and it was difficult to squeeze the twentieth line in.î             

 The strange feeling she had got stronger as he talked about that time. But he wasnít telling her in order to shock her. He only seemed to be comparing how happy he was now to the difficult times he had faced before.              

 ìI have looked at the moon, speculating thousands of times about the unborn child I was taken from. Wondering if it were alive. Wondering if it had been born alive, or if the poor motherís shock had killed it. Wondering if it was a boy that would someday avenge his fatherís imprisonment. There was a time when I was in prison when I wanted revenge so badly I could hardly stand it. Wondering if it was a boy who would never know what had happened to his father, or who might even think that his father had left on his own. Wondering if it was a daughter who would grow up to be a woman.î             

 She pulled closer to him and kissed him on the cheek and hand.              

 ìI have pictured my daughter as having forgotten about me. That is, not knowing anything about me. I have thought about how old she was year after year. I pictured her marrying a man who knew nothing about what had happened to me. I imagined I had been forgotten by everyone alive and that the next generation would know nothing about me.î             

 ìFather! Even to hear that you thought such things about a daughter who never existed hurts me as if I had been the daughter you speak of.î             

 ìYou, Lucie? It is because of the comfort and strength that you have brought me that we can talk about these memories now under the moonlight on our last night together. What did I say just now?î             

 ìThe daughter you had imagined didnít know anything about you and didnít care about you.î             

 ìSo! But on other moonlit nights, when I have been in a different mood, one like a sad sense of peace, I have imagined that she came to visit me in my cell and took me out of the prison and to freedom. I often imagined her standing in the moonlight as I see you doing now. Except that I never got to hold her in my arms. The image was between my little grated window and the door. But you understand that that is not the child I am talking about.î             

 ìThe figure was not in your imagination?î             

 ìNo. That was another thing. It stood before my eyes but it never moved. The phantom that I was dreaming about was another real child. I donít know anything about what she looked like other than that she looked like her mother. The other child looked like her tooó like you doóbut not the same. Do you understand what Iím saying, Lucie? Hardly, I think. Youíd probably have to be a lonely prisoner to understand the confusing differences between imagination and reality.î          

 Even though he was calm she was troubled as he tried to describe what it had been like for him.              

 ìWhen I was in that more peaceful state of mind, I would imagine her coming to me in the moonlight and taking me out to show me the home where she lived with her husband. It was full of memories of her lost father. She had a picture of me in her room and prayed for me. She led a happy, productive life, but my sad story was still a part of it.             

 ìI was that child, father. I wasnít half as good a daughter as that, but I loved you just as much.î             

 ìShe showed me her children too,î said Doctor Manette. ìThey had heard of me and been told my sad story. When they went by a prison they stayed far away from its walls and looked up at the barred windows and spoke in whispers. She couldnít free me. I imagined that she always brought me back to the prison after showing me these things. But then, after the relief of crying, I would fall to my knees and bless her.î             

 ìI hope that I am that child, father. O my dear father, will you bless me as eagerly tomorrow.î              

 ìLucie, the reason I remember these troubled times is the same reason I love you tonight more than words can say. I thank God for how happy I am. My thoughts, when they were the most disturbed, never reached the happiness that I have had with you and that we have still ahead.î             

 He hugged her, asked that Heaven watch over her, and thanked Heaven for giving her to him. Then they went into the house.              

 No one was invited to the wedding except for Mr. Lorry. The only bridesmaid was Miss Pross. The married couple wouldnít move to another house. They would take the upper rooms that had previously belonged to the lodger that they never saw, and they wanted nothing more.              

 Doctor Manette was very happy at their little supper. There were only three of them at the table. Miss Pross was the third. He wished that Charles had been there, and he was nearly ready to object to the romantic little plan that kept Charles away. He toasted to him warmly.              

 The time came when he had to say goodnight to Lucie and they parted ways. But at three in the morning Lucie came downstairs again and snuck into his room, bothered by fears and worries.              

 Everything was in order, though. It was quiet, and he was sleeping. His white hair looked pretty on his pillow, and his hands rested quietly on the blanket. She put her candle in the shadows far away and snuck up close to his bed. She kissed him, then leaned over and looked at him.              

 Being a prisoner had left its marks on his handsome face. But he worked so hard to cover up the marks that he hid them even when he was asleep. A more remarkable face than his could not be found that night, as he quietly and determinedly struggled with his demons.             

 She timidly put her hand on his chest and prayed that she could be as devoted to him as she hoped to be, and as his terrible past deserved. Then she removed her hand, kissed him again, and left. The sun rose and the shadows of the leaves of the plane tree moved on his face as softly as her lips had moved when she had prayed for him.              

 The sun was shining brightly on the day of Charles and Lucieís wedding, and the wedding party was ready outside of Dr. Manetteís room. The door was closed and the doctor was speaking with Charles Darnay. The beautiful Miss Manette, Mr. Lorry, and Miss Pross were all ready to go to the church. Miss Pross had gradually come to accept the fact that Miss Manette would get married sooner or later. She would have been completely overjoyed by the wedding except for the fact that she still believed her brother, Solomon, should have been the groom.             

 ìAnd so,î said Mr. Lorry, who could not admire the bride enough and who had been moving around her to see every part of her simple, pretty wedding gown. ìThis is why I brought you across the English Channel when you were young, my sweet Lucie! Lord bless me! I thought I was doing such a small thing. I didnít realize how important it would one day be for my friend Mr. Charles!î             

 ìYou didnít mean for them to get married,î commented the straightforward Miss Pross, ìand therefore how could you have known that this would happen? Thatís nonsense.î             

 ìReally? All right. But donít cry,î said the gentle Mr. Lorry.             

 ìIím not crying. Youíre crying,î said Miss Pross.             

 ìI, my dear Miss Pross?î By now, Mr. Lorry dared to be nice to her sometimes.             

 ìYou were crying just now. I saw you, and Iím not surprised about it. Your gift of plates and silverware is so impressive that it would make anybody cry. Thereís not a fork or a spoon in the whole collection that didnít make me cry until I couldnít see through my tears when the box arrived last night,î said Miss Pross.              

 ìThank you very much,î said Mr. Lorry. ìThough I hadnít intended for my meager gift to make anyone cry so much. Dear me! This is an occasion that makes a man reflect on all the things he has lost in his life. Dear, dear, dear! To think that I might have gotten married myself sometime in these last fifty years.î             

 ìNot at all!î said Miss Pross.             

 ìYou think itís not possible that there could have been a Mrs. Lorry?î asked Mr. Lorry.             

 ìPooh!î answered Miss Pross. ìYou were born to be a bachelor.î             

 ìWell!î said Mr. Lorry, adjusting his little wig happily. ìThat seems likely, too.î             

 ìAnd you were made to be a bachelor before you were put into your cradle,î continued Miss Pross.             

 ìThen I think that I had bad luck,î said Mr. Lorry. ìI should have had some choice as to whether I would get married. Enough of this! Now, my dear Lucie,î he said, putting his arm around her waist, ìI hear them in the next room. Miss Pross and I, as two formal businesspeople, donít want to miss our last chance to say something reassuring to you. You are leaving your father in hands as honest and loving as your own. He will be taken care of in every possible way. During the next two weeks, while you are in Warwickshire and the surrounding area on your honeymoon, Iíll even set aside my obligations to Tellsonís Bankóto some extentóin order to look after your father. And, after two weeks, when he comes to join you and your husband on your other two-week trip to Wales, you will see that we kept him in the healthiest and happiest condition. Now, I hear your husband coming to the door. Let me kiss you and give you an old-fashioned bachelorís blessing, before your husband comes to take you for his own.î              

 He held her beautiful face in his hands for a moment and looked at the expression on her forehead that he remembered so well. Then he touched her head with his tenderly, her blond hair pressing against his little brown wig. The gesture was old-fashioned enough to have been around since the days of Adam and Eve.              

 The door of Dr. Manetteís room opened and the doctor came out with Charles Darnay. Dr. Manette hadnít looked pale at all when they went into the room together, but now he looked so deathly pale that there was no trace of color in his face. He kept his composure, though. Only the shrewd Mr. Lorry noticed that he seemed a little like the way he had been after his release from prison.          

 The doctor offered his arm to Lucie, and he took her downstairs to the chariot that Mr. Lorry had hired for the occasion. The rest of them followed in another carriage, and soon Charles Darnay and Lucie Manette were happily married privately in a nearby church.             

 Everyone in the little group that watched them get married was smiling and had tears in their eyes. Lucie had some diamonds on her hand that Mr. Lorry had given to her out of one of his pockets. They all went home for breakfast, and all of it went well. Soon Miss Manette and her father, who had first embraced in the attic in Paris, were embracing again in the morning sunlight. They stood together in the doorway and said goodbye.              

 It was hard for them to say goodbye, though it didnít last long. Her father cheered for her, and gently pulling himself away from her embrace, finally said, ìTake her, Charles! She is yours!î              

 She waved to them emotionally from a window of the chaise as she and her husband drove off. Then she was gone.              

 The street corner was off the main street and the wedding festivities had been very small and simple. The doctor, Mr. Lorry, and Miss Pross were now left all alone. When they went back inside in the welcome shade of the hall of the doctorís house, Mr. Lorry noticed that something had changed about the doctor. It was as if he had been struck by the golden arm of the goldsmith next door. He looked sick.             

 He had kept many of his feelings to himself, of course, and some strong emotions might have been expected to come out of him once the bride and groom had left. But what worried Mr. Lorry was the frightened look on the doctorís face, and the fact that the doctor had absent-mindedly grabbed his head in his hands and wandered off into his room when they got upstairs. It reminded Mr. Lorry of Defarge, the owner of the wine shop, and their night ride away from Paris under the stars.              

 ìI think it would be best if we didnít talk to him right now or disturb him at all,î he whispered to Miss Pross. ìI need to go to Tellsonís Bank. Iíll go there now and come back very soon, and then we will take him on a ride into the country and eat dinner there. Everything will be fine.î             

 It was easier for Mr. Lorry to stop in at Tellsonís than it was for him to leave Tellsonís. He was delayed there for two hours. When he came back, he climbed the old staircase alone without bothering the servant. On his way into the doctorís rooms, he heard the sound of quiet knocking.             

 ìGood God!î he said, startled. ìWhatís that?î             

 Miss Pross was there, looking terrified. ìOh me! Oh me! All is lost!î she cried, wringing her hands. ìWhat will we tell Lucie? He doesnít recognize me. And heís making shoes!î             

 Mr. Lorry tried his best to calm her down and went into the doctorís room. The bench had been turned toward the light, as it had been when Mr. Lorry had seen him making shoes in the attic in Paris. His head was bent over, and he was very busy.              

 ìDr. Manette. My dear friend, Dr. Manette!î             

 The doctor looked at him for a moment, half questioningly and half as if he were angry that someone spoke to him. Then he bent over his work again.             

 He had laid aside his coat and waistcoat. His shirt collar was open the way it used to be when he had been making shoes before. Even his face looked old and worn out like it had before, and he worked hard and impatiently as if he had been interrupted.             

 Mr. Lorry looked at what he was working onóa shoe of the old size and shape. He picked up another shoe that was lying near him and asked what it was.              

 ìItís a young ladyís walking shoe,î he mumbled without looking up at him. ìI should have finished it a long time ago. Leave it alone.î             

 ìBut, Dr. Manette! Look at me!î             

 The doctor looked up at him in his old mechanical and submissive manner without stopping his work.             

 ìDo you know who I am, my dear friend? Think again. You are not a shoemaker. Think, my dear friend!î             

 Mr. Lorry couldnít make the doctor say anything more. The doctor would look up for a moment when he was asked to, but he wouldnít say a word. He worked and worked in silence, and he didnít seem to hear or respond to anything. The only sign of hope Mr. Lorry noticed was that sometimes he looked up without being asked to. When this happened there seemed to be a faint expression of curiosity and confusion on his face, as if he were trying to make sense of something in his mind.              

 Mr. Lorry immediately realized two very important things. The first was that they had to keep this a secret from Lucie. The second was that it had to be kept secret from everyone else who knew him. Together with Miss Pross they would start to tell people that the doctor was ill and needed a few days of rest. To keep the secret from Lucie, Miss Pross would write to her. She would say that the doctor had gone away on a professional matter and that she had received a letter from him of some two or three hurried lines that the doctor had written and mailed to her by the same post.              

 Mr. Lorry took these steps hoping that the doctor would get better again. If he recovered soon, Mr. Lorry had a plan. There was someone who Mr. Lorry thought would understand the doctorís case the best, and Mr. Lorry would ask for this personís opinion on the matter.              

 Hoping that the doctor would recover so that he could put this third plan into action, Mr. Lorry decided to watch him closely but to do it as subtly as possible. He took time off from Tellsonís Bank for the first time in his life and positioned himself in the window in the doctorís room.              

 Mr. Lorry soon discovered that it was useless to speak to him since it made him nervous. Mr. Lorry gave up on that idea on the first day and decided instead to stay near him at all times and hope that his quiet presence would stop the doctorís delusions, or at least keep them from getting worse. Mr. Lorry stayed at his seat near the window reading and writing and showing in as many pleasant ways as possible that it was a place where they were both free to do whatever they wanted.             

 Dr. Manette ate and drank what they gave him and kept working. That first day he worked until it was too dark to see. He worked for half an hour after Mr. Lorry couldnít have seen enough to read or write if his life depended on it. When finally Dr. Manette put aside his tools until the next morning, Mr. Lorry got up and asked him:             

 ìWill you go out?î             

 The doctor looked down at the floor on either side of him like he and then looked up at him, the way he used to in the attic in Paris. He repeated quietly:             

 ìOut?î              

 ìYes. Will you go for a walk with me? Why not?î             

 The doctor didnít try to answer him and didnít say another word. But as Dr. Manette leaned forward on his bench in the twilight, with his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands, Mr. Lorry thought he saw that he was in some way asking himself, ìWhy not?î Mr. Lorry, as a shrewd businessman, saw an advantage here and decided to follow up on it.              

 Miss Pross and Mr. Lorry took turns watching him at night from the next room. The doctor paced up and down for a long time before going to bed, but when he finally lied down, he fell asleep. He got up early in the morning and went straight to his bench to work.              

 The next day, Mr. Lorry called him by his name cheerfully. He spoke to him about topics that they had discussed recently. The doctor didnít answer, but it was clear that he heard what was said and that he thought about it, even though he was confused. This encouraged Mr. Lorry to have Miss Pross come in with her work several times a day. At those times they spoke quietly of Lucie and of her father, who was there, as if everything were normal. This was done simply and only for short periods of time. Mr. Lorry was glad that he was looking up at them more often and that he seemed to notice some of the inconsistencies around him.              

 When it was night again, Mr. Lorry asked him again as he had done before:             

 ìDear Doctor, will you go out?î             

 Like before, the doctor repeated, ìOut?î             

 ìYes, for a walk with me. Why not?î             

 This time, Mr. Lorry pretended to go out when he couldnít get an answer from him. He stayed away for an hour and then came back. In the meantime, the doctor had moved to the window seat and had sat there looking down at the plane tree. When Mr. Lorry came back, though, the doctor moved back to his bench.              

 The time went by slowly, and Mr. Lorry started to worry again. He worried more and more day after day. The third day came and went, then the fourth and fifth. Five, six, seven, eight, and nine days went by.              

 Mr. Lorry grew more and more anxious as the time passed. They kept the secret well. Lucie knew nothing about it and was happy. But Mr. Lorry could tell that the doctor, who had been a little out of practice at first, was getting better and better at making shoes and that he had never been so focused on his work. His hands had never been so quick and skilled as they were at dusk on the ninth night.              

 Mr. Lorry was so tired out by anxiously watching the doctor that he fell asleep. On the tenth morning of the doctorís illness, Mr. Lorry was startled by the sun shining into the room, since he had dozed off when it was dark night.             

 He rubbed his eyes and got up, but once he was up, he thought he might still be asleep. Looking into the doctorís room, he saw that the shoemakerís bench and tools had been set aside again. The doctor was sitting by the window reading, and he was in his usual morning clothes. Mr. Lorry could see his face clearly. He was still very pale, but he looked calm and focused.             

 Even when he was sure that he was actually awake, Mr. Lorry wondered for a few moments whether the doctorís recent shoemaking had all been a dream. He could see his friend in front of him dressed and looking as usual, and reading as he normally did. Was there any sign that the change in the doctor that he had seen during the past few days had actually happened?             

 He only asked himself this in his first moment of confusion and surprise. The answer was obvious: if the doctor hadnít really relapsed into making shoes, then how had he, Jarvis Lorry, come to be there? How had he fallen asleep in his clothes on the sofa in Dr. Manetteís consulting room, and how was he there having these thoughts outside the doctorís bedroom early that morning?             

 Miss Pross was there within a few minutes, whispering quietly beside Mr. Lorry. If he had any doubts left, the way she spoke about the situation would have decided the matter. By then, though, he was clearheaded and had no doubts. He decided that they should leave the doctor alone until the usual breakfast time, then they would meet the doctor as if nothing unusual had happened. If he seemed to be behaving as he typically did, Mr. Lorry would then cautiously start looking for help from the man whose opinion he so anxiously wanted to hear.             

 Miss Pross followed his advice and they worked out the plan carefully. Mr. Lorry had plenty of time for his usual   toilette the process of attending to your personal appearance  toilette , and he arrived at breakfast in his usual white linen with his usual tight stockings. The doctor was called as usual, and he came to breakfast.              

 Mr. Lorry delicately asked the doctor some questions. Apparently, the doctor first thought that his daughterís marriage had taken place only the day before. Mr. Lorry mentioned briefly what day of the week and month it was. This got the doctor to thinking and counting the days. This apparently made him uneasy. In all other ways, however, he behaved so much like his usual self that Mr. Lorry decided to get the help he wanted. He wanted help from Dr. Manette himself.          

 When they had finished breakfast and the table had been cleared, he and the doctor were left together. Mr. Lorry said to him emotionally:             

 ìMy dear Dr. Manette, I want to get your opinion on something in secret. There is a very strange case that I am very interested in. That is, it is strange to     me. Perhaps since you are more knowledgeable it will be less strange to you.î             

 The doctor looked at his hands, which were discolored from his recent shoemaking. He looked troubled and listened carefully. He had already looked at his hands more than once.              

 ìDr. Manette,î said Mr. Lorry, touching him affectionately on the arm. ìThe case is an especially close friend of mine. Please give it some thought. For his sake, and especially for his daughterís sake, tell me what I can do for him, my dear Dr. Manette.î             

 ìIf I understand correctly,î said the doctor quietly, ìitís about some mental shockó?î             

 ìYes.î             

 ìBe specific,î said the doctor. ìGive me all the details.î             

 Mr. Lorry saw that the doctor understood him, and he went on.             

 ìMy dear Dr. Manette, this person has had a shock that started long ago and has continued for some time. It is very severe and has greatly affected his emotions and, as you said, his mind. His mind. This person has suffered from this shock for a long time. No one can say how long exactly, because the person himself doesnít know how long itís been, and there are no other ways of finding out. This person has recovered, but he canít remember how. I once heard him say this publicly in a memorable way. He has recovered so completely from the shock that he is capable of difficult work with the mind and body. He is constantly adding to his stock of knowledge, which was already large to begin with. But unfortunately there has beenóî he paused and took a deep breath ìóa slight relapse.î             

 The doctor asked in a low voice, ìFor how long?î             

 ìNine days and nights.î             

 ìWhat was the relapse like?î The doctor looked at his hands again. ìIím guessing he started some old activity that was connected with the shock?î             

 ìYes, thatís correct.î              

 ìNow, did you ever see him doing that activity when he used to do it before?î asked the doctor, carefully,              

 ìOnce.î             

 ìAnd when he relapsed, was he in most ways, or in all ways, as he was then?î             

 ìI think he was exactly the same.î             

 ìYou spoke about his daughter. Does his daughter know about his relapse?î             

 ìNo. She has not been told, and I hope she will never be told. Only myself and one other trustworthy person know about it.î             

 The doctor took Mr. Lorryís hand and said quietly, ìThat was very kind and thoughtful of you.î Mr. Lorry took his hand in return, and neither of them spoke for a little while.              

 ìNow, my dear Dr. Manette,î said Mr. Lorry after a little while and in his most compassionate way. ìI am just a businessman. I am not fit to deal with such complicated matters. I donít have the necessary information or intelligence, and I need help. There is no man in the world that I could rely on for help more than you. Tell me, how does this relapse happen? Is it possible there will be another? Is there a way to stop it from happening again? If it does happen again, what should we do? How does it happen at all? What can I do to help my friend? There is no man that could want to help his friend more than I want to help mine, if I only knew how.î             

 ìBut I donít know how to begin in such a case,î continued Mr. Lorry. ìIf your wisdom, knowledge, and experience could put me on the right track, I might be able to do a lot. But uninformed and without help, I canít do much of anything. Please talk with me about it. Please help me understand it better and teach me how to be of more help.î             

 Dr. Manette sat thinking over these sincere words, and Mr. Lorry did not pressure him.             

 ìI think itís likely that the patient may have expected the relapse you have described,î said the doctor, requiring an effort to break the silence.             

 ìWas he afraid it might happen again?î Mr. Lorry asked.             

 ìVery much.î He said it with an involuntary shudder.             

 ìYou have no idea how troublesome such a fear is to a person, and how difficultóhow almost impossibleóit is for him to make himself talk about the subject that haunts him.î             

 ìWould it help him,î asked Mr. Lorry, ìif he could tell someone else that secret when it is bothering him?î             

 ìI think so. But it is, as I have told you, almost impossible. I even think that, in some cases, it is impossible.î              

 ìNow,î said Mr. Lorry, gently laying his hand on the doctorís arm again. After a short silence he said, ìWhy do you think this attack happened?î             

 ìI believe,î answered Dr. Manette, ìthat something caused him to start thinking about the things that first caused the sickness. He recalled some strong, intense memories. Itís likely that, for a long time, there had been a dread in the back of his mind that those memories might come back to him, under certain circumstances, for instance, or on a particular occasion. He tried to prepare himself for it, but it was no use. Itís possible that trying to prepare himself for it made it worse.î             

 ìWould he remember what happened during the relapse?î asked Mr. Lorry hesitantly.             

 The doctor looked around the room sadly, shook his head, and answered quietly, ìNot at all.î             

 ìWhat do we do in the future?î asked Mr. Lorry.             

 ìNow,î said the doctor, recovering himself, ìI have great hope. It gives me hope that he recovered from his relapse so soon. The fact that he gave in to the pressure of whatever was haunting him and recovered after the spell had passed gives me hope that the worst is over.î             

 ìWell, well! That makes me feel better. I am thankful!î said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìI am also thankful!î repeated the doctor, bowing his head with respect.             

 ìThere are two other things that I would like help with,î said Mr. Lorry. ìMay I go on?î             

 ìYou couldnít do your friend a better favor than to continue.î The doctor gave him his hand.              

 ìFirst of all, the patient studies a lot and is unusually energetic. He works very hard at acquiring professional knowledge, at conducting experiments, and at doing many other things. Now, does he work too hard?î             

 ìI donít think so. It may just be the way he is. His mind might always need to be occupied. That might partly be in his nature and partly a result of the sickness. The less his mind is occupied with healthy things, the more it would be in danger of focusing on unhealthy things. He may have noticed this about himself.î              

 ìYouíre sure that he is not under too much stress?î             

 ìI think I am quite sure of it.î             

 ìMy dear Manette, if he were overworked nowóî             

 ìMy dear Lorry, I doubt that that would happen easily. He has experienced extreme stress in one direction. He needs the opposite to balance himself out.î             

 ìExcuse me, but Iím a businessman and tend to be persistent. Assuming that he     was overworked, wouldnít it show itself in a relapse?î             

 ìI donít think so,î Dr. Manette said confidently. ìI donít think that anything but the one train of thought would bring it back. I think that, from now on, nothing but some extreme memory or association could bring it back. After what has happened, and after his recovery, I find it hard to believe that such an extreme event could happen again. I trust, and am almost sure, that the circumstances likely to cause a relapse have already been used up.î              

 He spoke with the hesitancy of a man who knew how easy it was to disturb the delicate organization of the mind, but he also spoke with the confidence of a man who had slowly earned his self-assurance from personal endurance and distress. It wasnít Mr. Lorryís place to doubt that confidence. Mr. Lorry claimed to be more relieved and encouraged than he really was and moved on to his second question. He felt that it was the most difficult of all of them, but remembering his Sunday morning conversation with Miss Pross and what he had seen in the past nine days, he knew that he had to face it.             

 ìThe occupation the patient took up during this temporary relapseóî said Mr. Lorry, clearing is throat, ìówe will call it ëblacksmithís work.í Letís say that during the dark times in his past, the patient used to work at a little forge. Letís say that we unexpectedly found him at his forge again. Isnít it bad for him to keep it close to him?î             

 The doctor covered his eyes with his hand and tapped his foot nervously on the ground.              

 ìHe has always kept it by him,î said Mr. Lorry, looking anxiously at the doctor. ìNow, wouldnít it be better to let it go?î             

 The doctor kept his eyes shaded and kept tapping his foot nervously on the ground.              

 ìDo you find it difficult to give me advice?î said Mr. Lorry. ìI think itís a good question. And yet, I thinkóî Then he shook his head and stopped talking.          

 ìYou see,î said Dr. Manette, turning toward him after an uneasy pause, ìitís very hard to explain consistently the way this poor manís mind works. He once longed for that activity so desperately, and it was so welcome when it came. It relieved him of his suffering by allowing him to substitute physical work of the fingers for mental work of the mind. By substituting, as he got better at it, he was able to substitute creativity with his hands for creativity of the mind. As a result, he has never been able to consider putting it entirely out of reach. Even now, when I believe he has more hope for himself than ever and talks about himself with more confidence than ever, the idea that he might need to go back to his blacksmith work and not find it terrifies him as if he were a lost child.î             

 He looked a lot like a lost child as he looked up at Mr. Lorry.             

 ìBut might notó Keep in mind, Iím asking for information as a slow businessman who only deals with tangible objects like guineas, shillings, and bank notes. Might not the fact that he keeps the object near him mean that he keeps those memories near him? If the man got rid of the forge, my dear Dr. Manette, wouldnít he get rid of the fears with it? In short, isnít the man giving in to his fear of relapsing by keeping the forge near him?î             

 There was another silence.             

 ìYou see too,î said the doctor, nervously, ìit is like an old friend.î             

 ìI wouldnít keep it,î said Mr. Lorry, shaking his head. He became more confident as he saw that the doctor was uneasy. ìI would tell the patient to give it up. I only lack your power to do it. I am sure it does no good. Come on! Give me your permission, like a good man. For his daughterís sake, my dear Manette.î             

 It was very strange to see the struggle going on within the doctor.              

 ìFor her sake, then, let it be done. I allow it. But I would not take it away while he is there. Take it away when is not there. Let him miss his old friend after he is gone.î             

 Mr. Lorry agreed to this and the conversation was over. They spent the day in the country, and the doctor was very much returned to normal. Over the three next days he stayed perfectly well, and on the fourteenth day the doctor left to join Lucie and her husband. Mr. Lorry had explained to him that they had made excuses for the fact that she hadnít heard from him. Mr. Lorry had written to Lucie about it, and she had no suspicions.              

 On the night of the day that Dr. Manette left, Mr. Lorry went into his room with an axe, saw, chisel, and hammer. Miss Pross went with him and carried a light. There, behind closed doors, and in a mysterious, guilty way, Mr. Lorry hacked the shoemakerís bench into pieces. Miss Pross held the candle as if she were helping with a murder, which, with her seriousness, she was suited for. They cut it up into small pieces and burned it right away in the kitchen fire. The tools, shoes, and leather were buried in the garden. Destruction and secrecy bother honest people so much that Mr. Lorry and Miss Pross, while they destroyed the bench and tools and got rid of the evidence, looked like accomplices in a horrible crime.              

 When the newlyweds came home, the first person that came to congratulate them was Sydney Carton. They had only been home for a few hours when he showed up. He wasnít any better-behaved or better in his appearance than he had been before, but he seemed more fit and dependable in a way that Charles Darnay had never noticed before.              

 Mr. Carton waited until he had a chance to take Darnay aside to a window to speak to him privately.              

 ìMr. Darnay,î said Carton. ìI hope we can be friends.î             

 ìI hope that we are already friends,î said Mr. Darnay.             

 ìItís nice of you to say so, since it is the polite thing to say, but I donít mean it as mere politeness. Actually, when I say I want us to be friends, I donít really mean just that either.î             

 Naturally, Charles Darnay asked him what he meant.             

 ìUpon my life,î said Carton, smiling, ìitís easier for me to understand than it is for me to explain. However, let me try. Do you remember the night we went to the tavern together after your trial? When I was even more drunk than usual?î             

 ìI remember a certain evening when you made me admit to you that you had been drinking.î             

 ìI remember it too. The consequences of those times haunt me, because I always remember them. I hope that God will take my regret into account when I am judged at the end of my life! Donít worry, though, Iím not going to preach to you.î          

 ìIím not worried. When you are sincere it doesnít worry me at all.î             

 ìAh!î said Carton, waving his hand casually as if he were waving away Mr. Darnayís comment. ìOn the drunken night in questionóone of many drunken nights for me, as you knowóI was rudely speaking about whether I liked you or disliked you. I hope you will forget all about it.î             

 ìI forgot about it a long time ago.î             

 ìYouíre just being polite again! But, Mr. Darnay, it is not as easy for me to forget things as you claim it is for you. I havenít forgotten it at all, and a casual answer doesnít help me forget it.î             

 ìPlease forgive me if it was a casual answer,î answered Darnay. ìI was only trying to take a minor incident that seems, to my surprise, to bother you too much and put it behind us. I give you my word as a gentleman that I forgot about it a long time ago. Good Heaven, what was there to forget? Didnít you do a great favor for me that day that I should remember?î             

 ìI need to tell you that the great favor I did for you was actually just professional nonsense,î said Carton. ìI donít think that I cared what happened to you when I did it. Mind you, Iím saying that that is how I felt back then. I am speaking about the past.î             

 ìYouíre making light of the important thing you did,î answered Darnay. ìBut I will not argue about your casual answer.î             

 ìItís the complete truth, Mr. Darnay, trust me! I have gone off track from what I wanted to say. Now you know me better. You know Iím incapable of being a better man. If you donít believe me, ask Mr. Stryver, and heíll tell you so.î             

 ìI would rather form my own opinion without hearing from Mr. Stryver.î             

 ìWell, at any rate you know that Iím a depraved dog. Iíve never done anything good in my life and never will.î              

 ìI donít know if its true that you never will.î             

 ìBut I do. You must take my word for it. Well! If you could stand to have such a worthless man with such a bad reputation coming and going here at odd hours, might I be allowed to come and go here as a friend? Think of me as a useless piece of furniture that is tolerated because itís been around for so long, and no one notices it. I would call myself an unattractive piece of furniture too if you and I didnít look alike. I wonít abuse your permission. Iíd bet a hundred to one that I will only take you up on it four times within a year. It would make me happy just to know that I had permission to come if I wanted to.î              

 ìWill you try to come?î             

 ìThatís another way of saying that you will grant me what Iíve asked. Thank you, Mr. Darnay. I may say that you and I are friends?î             

 ìI should think by now that you would, Mr. Carton.î             

 They shook hands on the matter, and Sydney Carton turned away. Less than a minute afterward he was as unnoticeable as ever.             

 Mr. Carton left, and Charles Darnay spent the evening with Miss Pross, the doctor, and Mr. Lorry. Darnay mentioned this conversation to them in passing, and he said it was a shame that Sydney Carton was such a careless and reckless man. He spoke of him, in other words, not with bitterness or meanness, but as anyone might who saw the way Mr. Carton behaved.             

 He had no idea that his beautiful young wife might be thinking about Mr. Carton, too. But later, when he joined her in their own rooms, she was waiting for him with the usual pretty frown on her forehead.              

 ìYou look concerned about something tonight!î said Darnay, putting his arm around her.             

 ìYes, dearest Charles,î she said, with her hands on his chest, She looked at him with a questioning expression. ìI am rather concerned tonight, for I have something on my mind.î              

 ìWhat is it, my Lucie?î             

 ìWill you promise not to ask any questions of me if I ask you not to?î             

 ìWill I promise? What wouldnít I promise you, my love?î             

 He brushed her golden hair from her cheek and placed his other hand against her heart.             

 ìI think, Charles, that poor Mr. Carton deserves more consideration and respect than you gave him tonight.î             

 ìReally, my love? Why do you say so?î             

 ìThat is the question you shouldnít ask me. But I thinkóI knowóthat he does.î             

 ìIf you know it, itís good enough for me. What do you want me to do, my darling?î             

 ìI want you to always be very kind to him and to forgive his faults when he is not near. I want you to believe that he is a kind, loving man even though he rarely lets anyone see that side of him. He has been hurt very badly. I have seen it.î             

 ìIt hurts me to know that I treated him poorly,î said Charles Darnay, surprised. ìI never knew this about him.î             

 ìItís true. Iím afraid he is a lost cause. There is hardly any hope that he can fix anything about his character or luck, but Iím sure that he is capable of doing good, kind, even generous things.î             

 Miss Manetteís faith in Mr. Carton made her look so beautiful that her husband could have looked at her for hours.              

 ìOh, my dearest love!î she said, pulling close to him and putting her head on his chest. Looking up at him, she said, ìRemember how happy we are, and how miserable he is!î             

 Darnay was moved by her request. ìI will always remember it, dear heart. I will remember it as long as I live.î             

 He leaned over her golden hair, kissed her, and took her in his arms. If Mr. Carton, who was wandering the streets in the dark, could have heard her innocent confession and could have seen her husband kiss the tears away from her soft, blue eyes, he might have cried out, ìGod bless her for her sweet compassion!î It wouldnít have been the first time he had said this about Miss Manette.              

 It has been mentioned that the street corner where Dr. Manette lived was a wonderful place to hear echoes. As she lived her life of quiet bliss with her husband, her father, and Miss Pross, and bound them together with her love, Lucie sat in the calm house in the tranquil corner, listening to the echoing footsteps over the years.             

 At first there were times when whatever she was working on would fall slowly out of her hands and she would look sad, even though overall she was a completely happy young wife. For there was something coming in the echoes, something far away and barely able to be heard, that upset her. She was caught between feelings of hope and doubtóhopes of a love still unknown to her and doubts that she would stay on earth long enough to enjoy that love. In the echoes she would hear the sound of footsteps at her own grave, as if she had died young, and she would think of her husband whom she had left so alone. In her imagination, he would mourn so much for her that his eyes would overflow with tears.              

 That time passed, and now she had her little Lucie, whom she cradled in her arms. Then she would hear among the echoes the sound of her daughterís tiny feet and her baby talk. She sat beside her cradle and could always hear those sounds, even when the other echoes were very loud. The other echoes came, and the shaded house was filled with a childís laughter. God, the friend of children, to whom Lucie had told her troubles, seemed to take her child in his arms, as he once took the child Christ, and made little Lucie a sacred joy to her.             

 In the years that she worked to bring them closer together and make them a happy family, Lucie heard in the echoes nothing but friendly and soothing sounds. Her husband was strong and prosperous. Her father was stable and healthy. Miss Pross was like an unruly   charger a large, strong cavalry horse  charger  who had been tamed and domesticated, and snorted and pawed at the ground under the plane tree in the garden.             

 Even when sad things happened, the echoes were neither harsh nor cruel. Even when they had a son who became sick, Lucieís tears were not all of agony. Before he died, their son, who had blond hair like his motherís, lay in bed and said, smiling radiantly, ìDear Papa and Mamma, Iím sorry I have to leave you and my pretty sister, but I am called and must go!î Lucie cried but did not fight back the tears. She knew her son was going to God.              

 Thus, it was like she heard the beating of angelís wings mixing in with the echoes. They sounded unearthly, as if they came from heaven. The sound of breezes blowing over a little tomb in a garden mixed with them also, and Lucie heard both of these, in a hushed murmurólike a summer sea lapping against a sandy shore. Little Lucie, so serious about her morningís work that she was funny to see, or dressing a doll near her motherís footstool, chattered in English and Frenchóthe languages of London and Paris, which had mixed in with her life.              

 Sydney Carton rarely came walking down their echoing street corner. About six times a year at most he used his privilege of showing up uninvited, and he would sit with them through the evening as he had once done frequently. He was never drunk with wine when he came there. And one other thing about him was whispered in the echoes. It is something that has been whispered by all true echoes for a long time.              

 Whenever a man has truly loved a woman, lost her, and kept his feelings for her after she has become a wife and a mother, the womanís children have always felt a strange sympathy for him. No one knows how the children are able to sense this, but it happens, and that is what happened with Mr. Carton. He was the first stranger Little Lucie held out her chubby arms to when she was a baby, and they maintained their connection as she grew up. The little boy had talked about him almost until the day he died, saying, ìPoor Mr. Carton! Give him a kiss for me!î              

 Mr. Stryver shoved his way toward success as a lawyer, like a ship plowing through rough waters, and dragged his helpful friend Mr. Carton along with him. Sydney, like a sinking boat, had a tough time being dragged along, but since he had always done so, he continued with that life. Mr. Cartonís attachment to the life he was used to, unfortunately stronger in him than any desire to desert Mr. Stryver or avoid the disgrace of this life, made that life the one Mr. Carton was to lead. He didnít think any more of being the jackal to Mr. Stryverís lion than a real jackal would think of becoming a lion. Stryver was rich. He had married an old widow with property and three boys, who had nothing particularly exciting about them but the straight hair on their fat heads.             

 Mr. Stryver was a terrible father figure. He had marched the three young gentlemen like sheep to the Manetteís house where he presented them as students for Mr. Darnay. As he did he said crudely, ìHello! Here are three lumps of bread and cheese toward your marriage picnic, Darnay!î When Darnay politely rejected them as students, Mr. Stryver became indignant. He later used this to teach the boys a lesson, telling them to beware of the pride of beggars, like that tutor fellow, Darnay. He was also in the habit of telling Mrs. Stryver over his wine all about the clever ways Mrs. Darnay had once used to ìcatchî him, and all the even more clever ways he had avoided being caught. Some of his colleagues from the Kingís Bench, who came there to drink with him excused his lie by saying he had told it so many times that he now believed it himself. This is surely a way to make a bad offense worse. It would be justifiable to take anyone who said this off to some quiet spot and then hang him.              

 These were the sounds Lucie heard in the echoes. Sometimes she was thoughtful as she listened to them, and sometimes she was happy and laughing. This went on until her daughter was six years old. She cared very much about the echoes of her daughterís steps, and her fatherís, which were always active and self-controlled, and her husbandís. The faintest echoes of their house, which she ran with such smart, tasteful thrift that they had more than enough of what they needed, were music to her. There were echoes of her father telling her that he thought she had become even more devoted to him after marrying (if that were possible) than when she was single. There were echoes of the many times her husband had said that none of her worries or responsibilities had taken her love or help away from him and had asked her, ìWhat magic is it that makes you able to be everything to all of us, as if there were only one of us? Yet, you never seem hurried or too busy.î             

 But there were other echoes that were rumbling off in the distance all this time. And it was around Little Lucieís sixth birthday that they started to get louder, like a great storm in France with a dreadful sea rising.              

 One night in the middle of July 1789, Mr. Lorry came in late from Tellsonís Bank and sat down by Lucie and her husband in the dark window. It was a hot, wild night, and they were all reminded of that Sunday night years before when they had sat in the same place and watched the lightning.              

 ìI was starting to think that Iíd have to spend the night at the bank,î said Mr. Lorry, pushing back his brown wig. ìWe were so busy all day that we didnít know what to do first or where to go. There is such nervousness in Paris that there was actually a run to put money in Tellsonís Bank! Our customers in Paris canít seem to transfer their property to us fast enough. Theyíre all practically mad about sending their valuables to England.î             

 ìThat looks bad,î said Darnay.              

 ìLooks bad, you say, my dear Darnay? Yes, but we donít know what sense there is in it. People can be so irrational! Some of us at Tellsonís are getting old and canít be bothered with unusual things happening unless thereís a good reason for it.î             

 ìStill,î said Darnay, ìyou know how gloomy and threatening the situation is over there.î             

 ìDonít I know it,î agreed Mr. Lorry, trying to convince himself that he was just in a bad mood and that he was complaining. ìBut I want to complain after my long, annoying day. Where is Dr. Manette?î             

 ìHere he is,î said the doctor, coming into the dark room.              

 ìIím happy that youíre at home. All of this anxiousness that Iíve been surrounded by all day has made me nervous for no reason. Youíre not going out, I hope?î             

 ìNo. Iím going to play backgammon here with you, if you want,î said the doctor.              

 ìI donít think I want to, if I can speak my mind. Iím too worried to compete against you tonight. Is the tea tray still there, Lucie? I canít see it.î             

 ìOf course. We kept it out for you.î             

 ìThank you, my dear. Your precious daughter is safe in bed?î             

 ìAnd sleeping soundly.î             

 ìThatís right. All is safe and sound! I donít know why everything shouldnít be safe and sound here, thank God. But I have been so overworked all day. Iím not as young as I used to be! My tea, my dear! Thank you. Now, come and join us in our circle. Letís all sit quietly and listen to the echoes that you have your theory about.î             

 ìItís not a theory; just something I like to imagine.î              

 ìItís your imagination then, my wise pet,î said Mr. Lorry, patting her hand. ìThese echoes are very numerous and very loud, though, arenít they? Listen to them!î             

 Charging, crazy, dangerous footsteps were raging in Saint Antoine far away, while a little circle of friends sat in the dark window in London. Footsteps that could force their way into anyoneís life. Footsteps that could not easily be cleaned after they have been stained red with blood.              

 That morning there had been a wide, dark crowd of scarecrow-like peasants moving back and forth in Saint Antoine. Sunlight often gleamed above their heads as it reflected off the steel blades and bayonets they carried. A huge roar came up from Saint Antoine, and many bare arms waived in the air like shriveled tree branches in the wind. People grabbed at every devilish weapon, or anything that could be used as a weapon, that they could find.             

 No one knew who gave out the weapons or where they last came from. No one knew what made them quiver and jerk over the heads of the crowd, bunches at a time, like a kind of lightning. But muskets were being handed out, and so were cartridges, powder, bullets, bars made of iron and wood, knives, axes, pikes, and anything that the enraged people could turn into a weapon. People who couldnít find anything else pulled stones and bricks out of walls until their hands bled. Everyone in Saint Antoine was angry and excited. Every living creature there gave no value to life, and was ready with a demented passion to sacrifice its own.             

 Just like a whirlpool has a center point, all this turmoil circled around Defargeís wine shop. It was as if every person were being pulled toward the center, where Defarge, already covered in gunpowder and sweat, was giving orders and weapons. He was pushing some men back, some forward, taking a weapon away from one man to give it to another, and working hard in the middle of the commotion.              

 ìStay close to me, Jacques Three,î yelled Defarge. ìAnd you, Jacques One and Two, split up and put yourselves in charge of as many of these patriots as you can. Where is my wife?î             

 ìHey! Here I am!î said Madame Defarge, as calm as ever, but not knitting today. Instead, Madame Defarge had an axe in her right hand and a pistol and a cruel-looking knife in her girdle.              

 ìWhere are you going, my wife?î             

 ìIím going with you right now,î said Madame Defarge. ìYouíll see me leading the women soon.î             

 ìCome, then!î yelled Defarge loudly. ìPatriots and friends, we are ready! To the Bastille!î             

 With a roar that sounded as if every person in France had yelled the word     Bastille, the crowd of peasants rose up and overflowed the city. With alarm bells ringing, drums beating, and the crowd thundering like the sea, the attack began.              

 There were deep ditches, a double drawbridge, huge stone walls, eight large towers, cannon, muskets, fire, and smoke to contend with. Through the fire and smokeóin the fire and smoke, for the crowd forced him up against a cannonóMonsieur Defarge the wine seller became a cannoneer. He worked like a fierce soldier for two hours.              

 Then there was one deep ditch, a single drawbridge, huge stone walls, eight large towers, cannon, muskets, fire, and smoke to contend with. One drawbridge had been taken down! ìWork, my friends, work!î shouted Defarge. ìWork, Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques One Thousand, Jacques Two Thousand, Jacques Twenty-Five Thousand, in the name of all the angels or the devilsówhichever you preferówork!î So Defarge the wine seller yelled, still at his cannon, which had long before grown hot from firing.             

 ìGather around me, women!î yelled Madame Defarge. ìWhat! We can kill as well as the men when we need to!î With a shrill, eager cry, crowds of women followed her. They all carried different weapons, but they were alike in their hunger for revenge.              

 There were still cannons, muskets, fire, and smoke to contend with. There was still the deep ditch, the single drawbridge, the huge stone walls, and the eight great towers. The crowd changed its shape as people fell down wounded. There were flashing weapons, blazing torches, wagonloads of burning wet straw. People were working hard at barricades everywhere, and there were the sounds of cries, gunfire, curses, unflinching bravery, booms, smashes, rattles, and the furious sounds of the crowd. But there was still the deep ditch, the single drawbridge, the huge stone walls, and the eight large towers. Defarge the wine seller was still at his cannon, which was twice as hot after firing for four straight hours.              

 A white flag rose from within the castle, and a   parley talks or negotiations between enemies  parley  was called for. The flag was barely visible through the battle, though, and nothing could be heard over the sounds of the battle. Then suddenly the crowd surged and carried Defarge the wine seller over the lowered drawbridge, past the huge stone outer walls, and in toward the eight large towers that had been surrendered!             

 The force of the crowd that was sweeping him along was so powerful that he couldnít even catch a breath or turn his head until he was in the outer courtyard of the Bastille. There, pushed up against an angle of a wall, he struggled to look around. Jacques Three was almost beside him, and Madame Defarge could be seen inside in the distance, still leading some of her women. She had her knife in her hand. Everywhere there was commotion, celebration, confusion, and deafening noise.             

 ìThe prisoners!î             

 ìThe records!î             

 ìThe secret prison cells!î             

 ìThe torture devices!î             

 ìThe prisoners!î             

 Of all these cries, and of the ten thousand things people yelled that could not be understood, ìThe prisoners!î was the cry that the crowd started to repeat. They rushed in as if they would keep pouring in forever. When the first wave of people rushed past, carrying the prison officers with them and threatening to kill them instantly if they didnít tell them about every inch of the prison, Defarge placed his hand on the chest of one of the officers. The man had gray hair and a lighted torch in his hand, and Defarge pulled him away from the rest of them and pushed him up against a wall.              

 ìShow me the North Tower!î said Defarge. ìQuick!î             

 ìI promise I will if you will come with me,î answered the man. ìBut there is no one there.î             

 ìWhat does One Hundred and Five, North Tower mean?î asked Defarge. ìQuick!î             

 ìWhat does it mean, monsieur?î             

 ìDoes it mean a prisoner, or a cell? Or should I strike you dead?î             

 ìKill him!î yelled Jacques Three, who had come up close to him.              

 ìMonsieur, it is a cell.î             

 ìShow it to me!î             

 ìCome this way, then.î             

 Jacques Three, looking hungry as usual and apparently disappointed that the conversation had taken a turn that wouldnít lead to bloodshed, held Defargeís arm as Defarge held the prison guardís. Their three heads had been close together during this brief conversation, and they could still barely hear each other since the crowd was so loud as it poured into the fortress and covered the courts and hallways and staircases. Outside, the walls shook with the roar of the crowd too, and individual yells and sounds could occasionally be heard above the uproar.              

 They made their way through gloomy vaults that had never seen the light of day, past the ugly doors of dark rooms and cages, down dark flights of steps and back up steep, rough climbs made of stone and brick that were more like dry waterfalls than staircases. Defarge, the guard, and Jacques Three were linked hand and arm, and they went as fast as they could. Here and there, especially at first, the crowd swept past them. But when they had gotten all the way down and were climbing up a tower, they were alone. Surrounded by the massively thick walls and arches, they could only hear the sound of the crowd inside and outside the fortress as a dull roar, as if the noise from where they had been before had almost deafened them.              

 The guard stopped at a low door, put a key into the lock, and slowly swung the door open. As they all bent down and walked inside, he said:             

 ìOne hundred and five, North Tower!             

 There was a small window high up in the wall. There was no windowpane in it, and it had a heavy grate over it. There was a stone screen in front of it, so that the sky could only be seen by stooping over and looking up. There was a small chimney a few feet inside with heavy bars across it. There was a pile of old wood ashes on the hearth, and there was a stool, a table, and a straw bed. There were four blackened walls, and a rusted iron ring in one of them.              

 ìMove your torch slowly over these walls so that I can see them,î Defarge told the guard.              

 The man obeyed, and Defarge looked at the wall carefully as the light passed over it.             

 ìStop! Look here, Jacques!î             

 ìA. M.!î said Jacques Three, reading greedily.              

 ìAlexandre Manette,î said Defarge. He traced the letters with his finger, which was covered in gunpowder. ìAnd here he wrote ëa poor physician.í And Iím sure he was the one who scratched this calendar on this stone. What is that in your hand? A crowbar? Give it to me!î             

 He still had the   linstock a long staff designed to hold a lit match and used to fire cannons  linstock  of his cannon in his hand. He traded the gun for the manís crowbar, turned to the worm-eaten stool and table, and smashed them to pieces.             

 ìHold the torch higher!î he said to the guard angrily. ìLook through those pieces carefully, Jacques. And look! Here is my knife.î He threw the knife to him. ìRip open the bed and look through the straw. Hold the torch higher, you!î             

 Looking angrily at the guard, he crawled to the hearth. Peering up the chimney, he poked and prodded at its sides with the crowbar and examined the iron grating across it. In a few minutes, some mortar and dust fell down. He turned his face away to avoid it and groped carefully in the chimney, in the old wood ashes, and into chink in the chimney that his crowbar had slipped into.          

 ìNothing in the wood, and nothing in the straw, Jacques?î             

 ìNothing.î             

 ìLetís gather all of it in the middle of the cell. Light them, you!î he said to the guard.             

 The guard set the little pile on fire, and it blazed high and hot. They bent over again to come through the low-arched door, leaving the pile burning behind them, and went back the way they came to the courtyard. It seemed their hearing returned as they came down, until they were in the middle of the raging crowd again.              

 The crowd was in a frenzy looking for Defarge himself. The people of Saint Antoine wanted their wine-shop keeper in the front of the group and guarding the governor, who had defended the Bastille and shot people. Otherwise, the governor would not be taken to the Hotel de Ville for judgment. Otherwise he might escape and the people would not get revenge on their spilled blood, which had been worthless for so many years but suddenly had value.             

 There was only one calm person in the passionate, angry crowd that seemed to be swallowing up the grim old officer in his gray coat and red decorations. That person was Madame Defarge. ìLook, thereís my husband!î she cried, pointing him out. ìLook at Defarge!î She stood close to the officer and stayed near him. She stayed close to him through the streets as Defarge and the rest of the crowd brought him along. She stayed close to him when he was near his destination and people began striking at him from behind. She stayed close to him when the crowd started to stab and hit him more and more. She was still close to him when he dropped dead from it. Then, suddenly coming alive, she put her foot on his neck and cut off his head with her crude knife.              

 The time had come when the people of Saint Antoine put their horrible plan of hanging men from street lamps into action. The anger of the people of Saint Antoine was up, and the time of tyranny and cruel domination was down. It was down on the steps of the Hotel de Ville, where the governorís body lay, and it was down on the sole of Madame Defargeís shoe, where she had stepped on his body to steady it while she cut off his head. ìHang him over there!î yelled the people of Saint Antoine, after looking for someone else to kill. ìHere is one of his soldiers to guard him!î Then they hung one of the governorís guards too, and the crowd moved on.              

 The crowd was dark, destructive, and violent, and its numbers and force were still unknown. The crowd of wavering shapes, voices of revenge, and faces hardened by suffering had no pity left in it.              

 In the crowd every, face had a fierce, angry expression on it, but there were two groups of facesóeach seven in numberóthat were different from the rest. There were seven faces of prisoners who had been freed suddenly by the crowd that had burst into the Bastille. They were carried high overhead, scared and lost and confused and amazed as if it were the last day on earth and the people who cheered around them were spirits. There were also seven other people carried higher by the crowd. Their seven dead faces drooped, as if on their way to judgment before God. Their faces were unemotional, but their expressions were frozenónot erased. They were faces that were caught as if they were about to open their eyes and say to their killers, ìYou did it!î             

 Seven prisoners had been released, and seven bloody heads had been put on pikes. There were the keys to the Bastille and its eight strong towers, some letters, and other memorials of prisoners that had been discovered that had died long ago of broken hearts. Their footsteps of the people of Saint Antoine echoed as they marched through the streets of Paris in mid-July 1789. Now, Heaven win out over the imagination of Lucie Darnay and keep these feet out of her life! For they are driven, crazy, and dangerous. After so many years since the wine cask broke outside the door of Defargeís wine shop, these footsteps canít be easily cleaned once they are stained red.              

 The exhausted people of Saint Antoine had had only one triumphant week to overcome their suffering with embraces and congratulations. Now Madame Defarge sat at her counter at the wine shop serving her customers as usual. Madame Defarge wasnít wearing her rose in her hair, for in one short week the large brotherhood of spies had become extremely cautious, as they knew they could soon be hanged like the streetlamps.              

 Madame Defarge sat out in the morning sun with her arms folded, thinking about the wine shop and the street. In both locations there were several groups of people. They were poor and unhappy, but now they had a noticeable sense of power placed over their unhappiness. Even the most miserable person in the most tattered nightcap was saying, ìI know how hard it has become for me to make a living, but do you know how easy it has become for me take your life away from you?î People who had been unemployed before now had the work of revenge available to them at all times. The fingers of the knitting women were vicious, knowing that they could tear. Saint Antoine looked different. It had been changing into this for hundreds of years, and the final changes of the past week were evident.             

 Madame Defarge sat watching the neighborhood. She disguised her pleasure with it, as the leader of the women of Saint Antoine should. Another woman was knitting next to her. The short, plump wife of a thin, starving grocer and the mother of two children, she was like a lieutenant to Madame Defarge. She had earned the nickname ìThe Vengeance.î             

 ìListen!î said The Vengeance. ìWhoís coming?î             

 A rumor rushed to them like a line of gunpowder set on fire.              

 ìItís Monsieur Defarge,î said Madame Defarge. ìSilence, everyone!î             

 Defarge came in out of breath, pulled off the red cap he wore, and looked around. ìListen, everyone!î Madame Defarge said again. ìListen to him!î Defarge stood there, panting as a crowd of people formed behind him outside the door and watched him with eager eyes and open mouths. Everyone in the wine shop had jumped to his feet.              

 ìWhat is it, my husband?î             

 ìNews from the outside world!î             

 ìHow?î yelled Madame angrily. ìThe other world?î             

 ìDoes everyone here remember old Foulon, who told starving people that they should eat grass, and who died and was sent to hell for it!î             

 ìEverybody does!î they all responded.              

 ìItís news about him. He is here among us!î             

 ìAmong us!î everyone responded. ìAnd dead?î             

 ìHeís not dead! He feared us so muchóand for good reasonóthat he pretended to be dead and had a large fake funeral. But they have found him alive, hiding in the country, and have brought him back to Paris. I have seen him just now on his way to the Hotel de Ville. He is a prisoner. I have said that he had good reasons to be afraid of all of us. Tell me, everyone! Was I right?î             

 They all shouted so loudly that a miserable old man more than seventy years old would have known in his heart that Defarge was right.              

 A moment of profound silence followed. Defarge and his wife looked steadily at each other. The Vengeance stooped over, and the bang of a drum was heard as she moved out from behind the counter at her feet.             

 ìPatriots!î said Defarge firmly. ìAre we ready?î              

 Instantly Madame Defarge had her knife in her girdle. The drum was beating in the street as if it and the drummer had come together by magic. The Vengeance, shrieking loudly and flinging her arms around over her head like all forty   Furies snake-haired winged goddesses in Greek mythology who punished wrongdoing  Furies , was running from house to house, calling the women to action.              

 The men were frightful, looking murderously out of the windows, grabbing whatever weapons they had, and running out into the streets. But the women were a sight that could frighten the bravest person. They ran outside with their hair streaming behind them, leaving all their household responsibilities, from the children to their old and sick family members who were crouching hungry and naked on their floors. They urged each other and themselves to madness by acting and shouting wildly. ìThe villain Foulon has been taken, Sister! Old Foulon has been taken, Mother! The troublemaker Foulon has been taken, Daughter!î Then, twenty other women ran into the midst of these, pounding on their chests, tearing their hair, and screaming, ìFoulon is alive! Foulon who told the starving people to eat grass! Foulon who told my aging father that he should eat grass when I didnít have any bread to give him! Foulon who told my baby to suck on grass when my breasts were dry of milk from starvation! Oh, mother of God, this Foulon! Oh, Heaven our suffering! Hear me, my dead baby and my withered father: I swear on my knees, on these stones, to take revenge on Foulon. Husbands, brothers, and young men, kill Foulonógive us his blood, his head, his heart, his body and soul. Tear him to pieces and bury him in the ground so he will make the grass grow.î With these cries, many women worked themselves into a blind frenzy and ran around hitting and tearing their own friends until they passed out from exertion. They were only saved from being trampled under foot by their husbands.              

 Nevertheless, they didnít lose a moment. Not a moment! Foulon was at the Hotel de Ville, and he might be let go. He would never be let go, though, if the people of Saint Antoine knew how they had suffered and been insulted and wronged. Men and women armed with weapons hurried from the neighborhood so fast, bringing everyone nearby with them, that within fifteen minutes no one remained in Saint Antoine but a few old women and some crying children.             

 No. By then they were all crowded into the Hall of Examinationówhere this mean, ugly old man wasó or they overflowed into the nearby streets. Monsieur and Madame Defarge, The Vengeance, and Jacques Three were in the front and very close to him in the Hall.              

 ìSee!î yelled Madame Defarge, pointing to him with her knife. ìSee the old villain tied with ropes. They did well to tie a bunch of grass on his back. Ha, ha! That was done well. Now let him eat it!î Madame put her knife under her arm and applauded as if she were at a play.              

 The people right behind Madame Defarge explained why she was so happy to the people behind them. Those people explained it to other people, and so forth. Soon people were applauding throughout the nearby streets. Similarly, during two or three hours of talking, the distant members of the crowd took up Madame Defargeís expressions of impatience surprisingly quickly. Quicker because some men who had climbed up the outside of the building to look in through the windows knew Madame Defarge well and would relay her expressions to the crowd outside.              

 After a while the sun rose so high that it was shining directly on the prisonerís head, as if giving off rays of hope or protection. This was too much for the crowd, and in an instant they charged in and seized him.              

 Even the most distant parts of the crowd knew about it right away. Defarge jumped over a railing and a table and grabbed the poor man in a deadly embrace. Madame Defarge followed him and twisted in her hand one of the rope he was tied up with. The Vengeance and Jacques Three hadnít reached them yet, and the men at the windows hadnít yet jumped down into the Hall, when it seemed that all of Paris had started to yell, ìBring him out! Bring him to a streetlamp!î             

 First he was down on the ground, then up again, then falling headfirst on the steps of the building. Then he was on his knees, then on his feet, then on his back. He was dragged, beaten, and choked by bunches of grass and straw that were shoved into his face by hundreds of hands. He was torn and bruised, panting and bleeding, and the whole time he was begging for mercy. He felt agony as people pulled each other back from him to get a look. Then a wooden log was pulled through the crowd. He was dragged to the nearest street corner, where one of the fatal streetlamps hung. There Madame Defarge let go of him, like a cat might let go of a mouse. She watched him quietly while they prepared, and he begged her for mercy. The women screamed at him all this time, and the men yelled that they wanted him to be killed with grass in his mouth. At one point, they hoisted him into the air and the rope broke, and the crowd caught him as he fell shrieking. It happened again. Then the rope held him, and his severed head was soon upon a pike with enough grass in its mouth for the people of Saint Antoine to dance in celebration.              

 This wasnít the end of thei dayís bad work. The people of Saint Antoine danced and shouted so much that they were worked into a frenzy again when they heard that Fulonís son-in-law, another enemy of the people, was coming to Paris guarded by five hundred   cavalry soldiers on horseback  cavalry  alone. The people of Saint Antoine wrote down his crimes on sheets of paper they waved and captured him. They would have captured him from an entire army to kill him along with Foulon. They put his head and his heart on pikes and carried them the old Foulonís head, through the streets in a parade.              

 It wasnít until nighttime that the men and women came back to their homes. Their children were crying and hungry, and the poor bakeries were filled with long lines of people who waited patiently to buy bad bread. While they waited hungrily, they passed the time by embracing and reliving the triumphs of the day. Eventually these lines of poor people broke up and they left. Then meager lights began to shine in the windows, and meager fires were made in the streets, where neighbors cooked together, then ate in their doorways afterward.              

 They were small, inadequate dinners without meat or much of anything else, but companionship added to the meal and made them happier. Fathers and mothers who had participated fully in the violence of the day played gently with their children. Lovers, surrounded by such a violent world, loved each other and hoped for the future.              

 It was almost morning when Defargeís wine shop was again empty of customers. Monsieur Defarge told his wife with his hoarse voice while he closed the door:             

 ìIt has come at last, my dear!î             

 ìWell, almost,î answered Madame Defarge.              

 The people of Saint Antoine went to sleep. The Defarges slept, and even the woman known as The Vengeance slept with her starved grocer husband. Her drum was silent. Its noise was the only sound that the bloodshed and commotion of the day hadnít changed. The Vengeance, as owner of the drum, could have gotten the same sound out of it before or after the Bastille fell or old Foulon was taken. But the hoarse voices of the men and women of Saint Antoine had been changed forever.              

 The village was different now. It was the village where the fountain once stood, and where the repairer of roads went every day to try to make enough money working on the highway to feed himself and keep himself alive. Now the prison on the cliff wasnít as intimidating as before. There were soldiers there to guard it, but not many of them. There were officers to guard the soldiers, but none of these officers knew what his men would doóthey only knew that the men would likely not do what they were ordered.              

 The countryside was ruined everywhere. It produced nothing but misery. Every leaf, blade of grass, and grain was as shriveled and poor as the miserable people. Everything was bent over, oppressed, and broken. Houses, fences, farm animals, men, women, children, and even the soil they lived off ofóall were worn out.              

 The upper class was supposed to be a blessing for the country. They made everything polite and mannerly and exemplified the life of luxury. Nevertheless, the upper class had somehow brought the country to this state. It was strange that the upper class, believing the universe had been designed for them, could be so quickly stripped of everything! There must be something shortsighted about the way the world was made! This is how it was, though. The upper class didnít run away from the threats of the pathetic lower class until the last drop of blood had been removed from the flints, and the last screw of   the rack a torture device with ratchets at either end that would pull the victimís limbs out of their sockets when turned  the rack  had been turned so often that its hold gave out, leaving it to turn and turn with no effect.             

 But this wasnít the change that took place in the village, and in the many villages like it. For many years, the upper class had abused the village and had hardly even come there except to hunt. Sometimes they came to hunt people, sometimes animals, for which the upper class preserved pieces of wild and barren wilderness. No. The change was that the rough lower classes were appearing, rather than that the beautiful upper classes were disappearing.             

 Now, the repairer of roads worked alone in the dust, not bothering to think that   he was made of dust and to dust he would return In the book of Genesis in the Bible, God creates man out of dust  he was made of dust and to dust he would return . He was too occupied thinking about how little food he had for dinner and how much more he would eat if he could. Now, as he looked up from working alone, he would often see a poor person walking toward him. This used to be a rare occurrence, but now it happened frequently. As the person came closer, the repairer of roads would notice without surprise that it was a shaggy-haired man who looked almost like a barbarian. The man would be tall and wearing wooden shoes that looked clumsy even to the repairer of roads. He would look unhappy and tattered, covered in mud and dust from walking along many highways, and damp with the moisture of the swamps. He would be covered with thorns, leaves, and moss from walking many paths through the woods.             

 One such man came to him, like a ghost, at noon one day in July. The repairer of roads was sitting on his pile of stones under a bank as he took shelter from a hail shower.              

 The man looked at him, looked at the village in the hollow, looked at the mill and at the prison on the crag. When he had seen these, he said in a dialect that was almost unintelligible:             

 ìHowís it going, Jacques?î             

 ìAll is well, Jacques.î             

 ìTouch then!î             

 They joined hands and the man sat on the pile of stones.             

 ìNo lunch?î             

 ìNothing but dinner now,î said the repairer of roads, looking hungry.             

 ìItís the same everywhere,î complained the man. ìNo one has any lunch.î             

 He took out a blackened pipe, filled it, and lit it with flint and steel. He puffed on it until it was glowing brightly, then suddenly held it away from him. He took something between his finger and thumb and dropped it into the pipe. It blazed and went out in a puff of smoke.              

 ìTouch then.î This time the repairer of roads said it after watching the man put the object in his pipe. They joined hands again.              

 ìTonight?î asked the repairer of roads.             

 ìTonight,î said the man, putting his pipe in his mouth.              

 ìWhere?î             

 ìHere.î             

 He and the repairer of roads sat on the pile of stones looking silently at each other. The hail was falling between them like tiny bayonets, and then the sky began to clear over the village.              

 ìShow me!î said the man, moving up the hill.             

 ìSee!î answered the repairer of roads, pointing with his finger. ìYou go down here, and straight through the street, and past the fountainóî             

 ìTo hell with that!î interrupted the man, looking over the landscape.     ìI donít go through the streets or past any fountains. Well?î             

 ìWell! About two   leagues a distance between 2.4 and 4.6 miles  leagues  past the top of the hill above the village.î             

 ìGood. When do you finish work?î             

 ìAt sunset.î             

 ìWill you wake me up before you leave? I have walked two nights without stopping. Let me finish my pipe and Iíll sleep like a baby. Will you wake me?î             

 ìOf course.î             

 The traveler smoked the rest of his pipe and put it in his pocket. He took off his big wooden shoes and lay down on his back on the pile of stones. He fell asleep immediately.             

 As the repairer of roads worked his dusty job, the hail clouds moved away to reveal streaks of sky, and the sun gleamed on the landscape. The little repairer of roads, wearing a red cap now instead of his blue one, seemed fascinated by the man sleeping on the heap of stones. He looked toward him so often that he did his work mechanically, and, one might say, badly. The tan face, the shaggy black hair and beard, the coarse wool red cap, the homemade clothes, the hairy skin, the strong frame that had been weakened by poverty, and the way he tightened his lips desperately while he slept, inspired awe in the repairer of roads. The traveler had traveled far, and his feet were sore from walking. His ankles were chafed and bleeding, and his big shoes were stuffed with leaves and grass and must have been heavy to drag over the long distance. There were holes worn in his clothes and sores all over his body. The repairer of roads crouched down beside him and tried to see if he had any weapons hidden in his shirt or anywhere else. But he didnít see any, because the man was sleeping with his arms crossed in front of him as tightly as his lips were closed. Fortress towns with their stockades, guardhouses, gates, trenches, and drawbridges seemed nothing compared to this man. When he turned his eyes to the horizon and looked around, he imagined he saw other similar figures, unstoppable, traveling to villages all over France.              

 The man kept sleeping. He didnít notice the showers of hail and periods of sunshine, the sunlight or shadow on his face, the lumps of ice on his body, and the diamond shapes the sun melted them into. The sun was low in the west and the sky was glowing. Then the repairer of roads was ready to go down to the village, so he gathered his tools and all his things and woke the man up.              

 ìGood!î said the traveler, lifting himself up on his elbows. ìTwo leagues past the top of the hill?î             

 ìAbout that.î             

 ìAbout that. Good!î             

 The repairer of roads went home with dust blowing ahead of him to wherever the wind took it. Soon he was at the fountain, joining the group of thin cows that had been brought there to drink, and even appearing to whisper to them. When the people in the village had eaten their small suppers, they didnít go to bed as usual, but came outside again and stayed there. A strange amount of whispering was going on, and when the crowd gathered around the fountain in the dark, they started looking at the sky in one particular direction. Monsieur Gabelle, the chief official of the area, became anxious. He went out on his rooftop alone and looked in the same direction as the crowd. He glanced down from behind his chimneys at the faces in the dark by the fountain below. Then he sent a message to the sacristan, who had the keys to the church, that they might need to ring the   tocsin alarm bell  tocsin  soon.              

 The night grew darker. The trees surrounding the old chateau, which kept it isolated, moved in a rising wind, as though they were threatening the chateau in the dark. The rain poured down the two flights of steps to the terrace and beat at the large front door, like a messenger trying to wake those inside. Wind rushed through the hall among the old spears and knives. With a sighing sound, it went up the stairs and shook the bed curtains where the last marquis had slept. Four disheveled people stomped through the high grass through the woods toward the chateau. They came from all directionsóeast, west, north, and southóand they broke branches as they walked cautiously to meet up in the courtyard. They lit four lights there, then moved off in different directions, and then everything was dark again.              

 But not for long. Soon, a light came on in the chateau, making it visible and appear as if it were glowing. Then a streak of flickering light could be seen behind the front of the building. It moved past balustrades, arches, and windows, lighting them up. Then it went higher and grew brighter. Soon flames burst out from many of the large windows and the stone faces could be seen staring out of the fire.              

 A faint murmur could be heard from the few people who were left at the chateau. Someone saddled a horse and rode away. There was the sound of someone spurring a horse on and splashing through the dark. The horse, foaming at the mouth from exertion, rode past the village fountain and stopped at Monsieur Gabelleís door. ìHelp, Gabelle! Help, everyone!î cried the man on the horse. The alarm bell at the church rang, but there was no other help to come. The repairer of roads and two hundred and fifty of his companions stood at the fountain with their arms folded, looking at the pillar of fire in the sky. ìIt must be forty feet high,î they said, seriously. They never moved.              

 The rider who had come from the chateau and the tired horse continued through the village. They galloped up the stony hill to the prison on the cliff. At the gate, a group of officers was looking at the fire, and a little ways off was a group of soldiers. ìHelp, officers! The chateau is on fire! We might be able to save valuable objects from the flames if we work fast! Help! Help!î The officers looked at the soldiers, who were looking at the fire. They didnít give any orders, just shrugged and answered, ìIt has to burn.î             

 As the rider went down the hill again and through the street, the village grew brighter. The repairer of roads and two hundred and fifty of his companions, inspired by the fire at the chateau, had hurried into their houses and were putting candles in every little pane of glass in the windows. Since they didnít have much of anything, they decided to force Monsieur Gabelle to lend them some of his candles. When Monsieur Gabelle hesitated to give them the candles, the repairer of roads, who had once been so submissive toward officials, threatened him. He said they could always make a fire with Gabelleís carriages and roast his post horses.              

 The chateau was left alone to burn. In the raging fire, a hot wind, issuing from the fire, seemed to be blowing the building away. The stone faces looked as if they were being tortured as the flames rose and fell. Large pieces of stone and wood fell, covering the face with the two dents that resembled the marquis. It became visible again, as if the marquis were being burned at the stake and were struggling with the fire.              

 The chateau burned down, and the trees closest to it also caught on fire and shriveled up. Trees far away, set on fire by the four fierce figures who had set fire to the chateau, sent more smoke to surround the building. Molten lead and iron boiled in the marble basin of the fountain, and the water dried up. The towerís tops, which looked like candle extinguishers, disappeared like ice in heat and melted into the flames. Huge splits and cracks appeared in the walls, as if it were crystallizing, and confused birds flew around in circles and fell into the furnace. The four fierce figures walked away in four different directionsóeast, west, north, and southóalong the dark roads. The light they had used to set the fire guided them toward their destinations. The village, which was lit up with candles, had taken over the alarm bell, and getting rid of the official ringer, the villagers rang the bell for joy.             

 Moreover, the people of the village were giddy with hunger, fire, and the ringing of the bell now. They started to think that Monsieur Gabelle collected their rent and taxes, even though in those later days it was only a small amount of taxes and no rent at all. They wanted to talk to him right away. They surrounded his house and told him to come out and talk to them. Monsieur Gabelle barred his door and stayed inside by himself. He went to his rooftop and hid behind his chimneys. He decided that if they broke his door down (he was a small man from the South with a vengeful personality) that he would throw himself headfirst over the edge and try to crush a person or two below as he fell.          

 Monsieur Gabelle must have spent a long night up on his roof, with the burning chateau providing his light, the banging on his door, and the ringing of the alarm bell. Not to mention the fact that on the road in front of his posting house gate hung a streetlamp, which the village wanted to replace with his hanging corpse. It was a stressful situation, to be spending an entire summer night on the brink of death, waiting to jump off his roof! But dawn finally appeared and the candles in the village burned out. The people all left, and Monsieur Gabelle came down from his roof, still alive for the time being.             

 Less than a hundred miles away, there were other fires burning and other local officials who werenít as lucky as Monsieur Gabelle. That night and other nights, when the sun rose, these officials were found hanging in the once-peaceful streets, where they had been born and raised. Also, there were other villagers and townspeople less fortunate than the repairer of roads and his companions, whom the officials and soldiers defeated and hanged. Regardless, the four fierce figures who had lit the fire were steadily making their way in four different directionsóeast, west, north, and southóand wherever someone was hanged, fire burned. How many people would have to die to satisfy them no official could say.             

 Three years went by, and the violence in France grew worse and worse without stop, while the people around it watched in terror and wonder. Little Lucie Manette had three more birthdays in her peaceful home.              

 The people at the Manette home had listened to the echoes in the street corner many days and nights, and their hearts would stop when they heard the crowd of footsteps. The footsteps now sounded like the footsteps of the French people, who had declared their turbulent country to be in danger and ruled it under the red flag of the Republic. They acted like they had been turned into wild beasts by many years of abuse.              

 The upper class had distanced itself from the fact that it was hated in France. Their presence was so unwanted there that they were in danger of being exiled from the country or even killed. The situation resembled the story of the farmer who worked hard to summon the devil, then became so scared when the devil finally appeared that he ran away before he could ask a question. Likewise, the upper class did much to bring this revolt about, then ran away as soon as they saw it happening.              

 The glittering, bullís-eye-shaped group of Royal Court members was gone, or it would have been a target for the whole country. It had always been oblivious, since it was proud, extravagant, and blind. Now it had disappeared entirely. The whole court, from its exclusive inner circle to the outermost ring of corruption, had also disappeared. The king and queen were gone. They had been overtaken at the palace and were ìsuspendedî when the last wave of rebellion took it over.              

 August 1792 had come, and the upper class of monseigneurs had by this time fled to many different places.              

 Naturally, Tellsonís Bank was the headquarters and gathering place of Franceís upper class in London. They say that ghosts haunt the places where their bodies used to be, and the upper class, without any money left, haunted the place where its money used to be. Moreover, it was the first place to hear the most reliable news from France. Tellsonís was a generous company, and it was very kind to old customers who had fallen on hard times. Those noblemen who had realized in time what was going to happen, and who had expected their valuables to be seized, had transferred much of their wealth to Tellsonís. Their unfortunate countrymen always talked about them at Tellson's. It must be added that nearly every new-comer from France reported his arrival and his condition to Tellsonís Bank. Consequently, Tellsonís was like a stock exchange for French information. This was so well-known, and people came there with so many questions about the events in France, that Tellsonís sometimes wrote the latest news out and put it up in the bankís windows for everyone in Temple Bar to read.              

 One steamy afternoon, Mr. Lorry sat at his desk. Charles Darnay stood leaning on it, talking to him quietly. The cell-like room, which had once been for interviews with the head of the bank, was now the newsroom, and it was filled to overflowing with people. It was within half an hour or so of closing time.          

 ìEven though you are as youthful as the youngest man that ever lived,î said Charles Darnay, hesitating, ìI still have to suggest to youóî             

 ìI understand. I am too old?î said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìYou will face bad weather, a long journey, unreliable means of traveling, a country in turmoil, and a city that might not even be safe for you.î             

 ìMy dear Charles,î said Mr. Lorry, with cheerful confidence, ìthese are some of the reasons why Iím going, not why I should stay away. It is safe enough for me. Nobody will want to bother an old man whoís almost eighty when there are so many people there that are more worth bothering than me. As far as the city being disorganized, if it were not disorganized there would be no reason to send someone from our office here in London to our office in Paris. Someone who knows the city and the business well and who can be trusted. As far as the uncertain traveling, the long trip, and the winter weather, if I werenít ready to suffer a bit for the sake of Tellsonís Bank after all these years, who should be?î             

 ìI wish I were going myself,î said Charles Darnay. He said it restlessly, and as if he were thinking aloud.             

 ìReally? Youíre one to talk!î said Mr. Lorry. ìYou wish you were going yourself? Youíre a Frenchman. Youíre a smart adviser, arenít you?î             

 ìMy dear Mr. Lorry, it is because Iím a Frenchman that the thoughtówhich I didnít mean to say out loud right nowóhas occurred to me often. I canít help thinking that I have abandoned the poor people of France,î Darnay said in his reasonable manner. ìThey might listen to me, and I might be able to persuade them to restrain themselves. Only last night, after you left us, when I was talking to Lucieóî             

 ìWhen you were talking to Lucie,î Mr. Lorry repeated. ìYes. Iím amazed that youíre not ashamed to mention her name! Wishing you were going to France!î             

 ìHowever, Iím not going,î said Charles Darnay, with a smile. ìThe point is that you say you're going.î             

 ìThe reality is that I am going. The truth is, Charles,î Mr. Lorry glanced at the head of the bank and lowered his voice, ìyou have no idea how difficult it is for us to conduct business there. Our records and papers in France are in serious danger. Lord knows what might happen to many people if some of our documents were taken or destroyed. And they might be taken at any time, you know. Who knows if Paris will be set on fire today or ransacked tomorrow? Now, only I can go there, take a careful selection from these documents, and bury them or otherwise get them out of harmís way. Should I stay here when Tellsonís knows this and tells me thisóTellsonís, where I have worked for sixty yearsóbecause Iím a little old? Why, I am a young boy, sir, compared to a dozen of the old men here!î             

 ìHow I admire your bravery and youthful spirit, Mr. Lorry.î             

 ìTut! Nonsense, sir! And, my dear Charles,î said Mr. Lorry, glancing at the head of the bank again, ìremember that getting anything out of Paris right now, no matter what it is, is almost impossible. Some papers and important matters were brought here just today by the strangest people you could imagine, all of whom could have been seized and had their heads chopped off as they passed through the barriers out of France. (I'm telling you this in secretóit is unprofessional for me to whisper about it, even to you.) Any other time our packages would come and go as easily as they would here in England. Now, everything has stopped.î              

 ìAnd are you really leaving tonight?î             

 ìIím really leaving tonight. The situation has become too urgent for me to delay.î             

 ìAnd you arenít taking anyone with you?î             

 ìMany different people have been suggested to me, but I donít want any of them. I plan to take Jerry. Jerry has been my bodyguard on Sunday nights for a long time and Iím used to him. Nobody will suspect Jerry of being anything but an English ruffian, or of having any idea in his head but to attack anyone who harms me.î             

 ìI have to say again that I admire your bravery and youthfulness.î             

 ìI say again thatís nonsense! When I have completed this little task, maybe I will accept Tellsonís offer to retire and live the easy life. Iíll have enough time then to think about growing old.î             

 This conversation had taken place at Mr. Lorryís desk. There were people of the French upper-class gathered within a yard or two of it, bragging about what they would soon do to avenge themselves on the peasants. It was just like these upper-class refugees, and just like the way of the British, to talk about this terrible Revolution as if it had come from nowhereóas if nothing had ever been done, or had not been done, to cause it. As if no one had seen millions of poor people in France suffering, or seen their resources, which should have made them prosperous, squandered. As if no one had seen it coming for years and had even written down what they saw. Such worthless talk, combined with the extravagant plans of the upper class to restore France to its former, unsustainable condition, was hard for any sane person who knew the truth to listen to. It was this kind of nonsense, like the conflict in his head and an uneasiness in his mind, that had made Charles Darnay restless, and that kept him restless now.             

 Mr. Stryver of the Kingís Bench bar was among the people talking. He was well on his way to getting a state promotion, and therefore was talking loudly on the subject. He was explaining to the monseigneurs his plan to blow up the peasants of France and exterminate them from the face of the earth. He wanted to go on without them, and he would eliminate them like you would exterminate eagles by sprinkling salt on their tails. Darnay was particularly offended by Mr. Stryverís comments, and he felt torn between leaving so that he wouldnít hear any more or staying and joining the conversation when something happened.             

 The head of the bank approached Mr. Lorry and put a dirty, unopened letter in front of him. He asked if Mr. Lorry had found the person to whom it had been addressed. The head of the bank laid the letter down so close to Darnay that he could see the name, and he noticed it immediately because it was his own name. The address, translated into English, was:             

 ìVery urgent. To monsieur formerly known as the Marquis St. Evremonde of France. Care of Tellson and Co. Bank, London, England.î             

 On the morning Charles and Lucie got married, Dr. Manette had made one request of Darnay: that the secret of Darnayís real name should be kept between the two of them, unless the doctor decided otherwise. Nobody else knew that it was Darnayís name. Even Charlesís wife, Lucie, had no idea about it, and Mr. Lorry couldnít know.              

 ìNo,î said Mr. Lorry, answering the head of the bank. ìI think I have asked everybody here, and no one can tell me where to find this gentleman.î             

 It was almost closing time at the bank, and the group that was talking passed by Mr. Lorryís desk. He held out the letter to them to see if they knew the name. One after another, the monseigneurs all looked at it resentfully. They all had something disapproving to say, in French or in English, about this scheming, offensive refugee marquis that no one could find.              

 ìHeís the nephew, I believe, or at least the unworthy successor, of the elegant marquis who was murdered,î said one of them. ìIím happy to say I never knew him.î             

 ìHeís a coward who abandoned his post some years ago,î said another. This particular man had snuck out of Paris upside down, almost suffocating, in a load of hay.             

 ìHe was infected with new thought,î said a third, looking at the address though a magnifying glass. ìHe opposed the last marquis, abandoned the estates when he inherited them, and left them to the peasants. I hope the peasants will pay him back as he deserves.î             

 ìHey?î yelled Stryver. ìDid he? Is that the kind of man he is? Letís look at his infamous name. Damn the fellow!î             

 Darnay wasnít able to restrain himself any longer. He touched Mr. Stryver on the shoulder and said:             

 ìI know the man.î             

 ìDo you, by Jupiter?î said Stryver. ìIím sorry to hear that.î             

 ìWhy?î             

 ìWhy, Mr. Darnay? Didnít you hear what he did? Donít ask why in these times.î             

 ìBut I am asking why.î             

 ìThen Iíll tell you again, Mr. Darnay. I am sorry that you know him. I am sorry to hear you asking such extraordinary questions. Here is a man who has been infected by the most diseased, offensive beliefs. He abandoned his property to the vilest scum of the earthómurderous peasants. And you ask me why Iím sorry that you, a teacher to children, knows him? Well, Iíll answer you. Iím sorry because I believe that such a scoundrel spreads disease. Thatís why.î             

 Remembering his secret, Mr. Darnay struggled to keep himself under control. He said, ìMaybe you donít understand the gentleman.î             

 ìI understand how to win an argument, Mr. Darnay,î said the bullying Mr. Stryver. ìAnd Iíll do it. If this fellow is a gentleman, I donít understand him. You can tell him so with my compliments. You can also tell him from me that after he gave up his property and title to this mob of butchers, Iím surprised heís not leading the mob himself. But, no, gentlemen,î said Stryver, looking around and snapping his fingers, ìI know something about human nature, and I tell you that youíll never find a man like this man trusting the peasants he claims to sympathize with. No, gentlemen, heíll always turn and run away very early in a fight.î             

 With those words, Mr. Stryver snapped his fingers a last time and shoved his way out into Fleet Street. The group around him who had been listening cheered and applauded, and Mr. Lorry and Charles Darnay were left alone at the desk as the bank emptied out.             

 ìWill you take the letter?î said Mr. Lorry. ìYou know where to deliver it?î             

 ìI do.î             

 ìWill you explain that we think it was addressed here in the hopes that we would know where to forward it, and that it has been here for quite some time?î             

 ìI will. Are you leaving for Paris from here?î             

 ìFrom here at eight oíclock.î             

 ìI will come back to see you off.î             

 Darnay was very unhappy with himself, and with Stryver and the other men. He made his way into Temple Bar, opened the letter, and read it. It said:             

 ìFrom Abbaye Prison, Paris             

 ìJune 21, 1792             

 ìTo monsieur formerly known as the marquis.             

 ìAfter having my life threatened by the villagers, I have been taken with great violence and humiliation and forced to walk a long distance to Paris. On the road I have suffered very much, and thatís not all. My house has also been destroyed.             

 ìThe crime they have imprisoned me for, former marquis, is treason against the people. Iíll be brought to stand trial in front of the tribunal and executed if you do not help me. They say that I have worked against them for an   emigrant someone who leaves his native country to live somewhere else  emigrant . I have been unable to convince them that I was working for them, not against them, according to your instructions. I have been unable to convince them that, before your property was taken away, I paid off the taxes they had stopped paying, that I had stopped collecting rent from them. Their only response to this was that I was acting on behalf of you, an emigrant. They demanded to know where you were.          

 ìOh! You, the former marquis, where are you? I yell out in my sleep ëWhere is he?íî I ask Heaven if you will come and help me. But there is no answer. Oh, you, the former marquis, I have sent this message across the sea, hoping that you will find it at Tellsonís Bank and help me!î             

 ìFor the love of Heaven, justice, generosity, and the honor of your noble family name, I beg you, former marquis, to help release me from prison. My crime is that I have been faithful to you, and I pray that you will be faithful to me!             

 ìFrom this horrible prison, where every hour brings me closer to my death, I pledge my sad faith, former marquis.             

 ìYour suffering servant,             

 ìGabelle.î             

 The letter awoke Darnayís uneasiness. The fact that his good, old servant, whose only crime was being faithful to Darnay and his family, was in trouble made him feel ashamed. As he walked back and forth in Temple Bar thinking about what to do, he almost hid is face in shame from the people walking by.              

 He knew very well that he had made mistakes. He had acted imperfectly in his handling of his familyís bad deeds and bad reputation, in his resentful suspicions toward his uncle, and in his dislike for Franceís crumbling social fabric. He knew that, although giving up his privileged place in society had long been on his mind, the way he had done it was hurried and incomplete because he had fallen in love with Lucie. He had meant to spend more time working it out and supervising it, but had never done so.              

 He knew that he had been distracted by the happiness of the life he had chosen in England, the necessity of having to work all the time, and the speed with which the troubles came about in France. The situation kept changing, and his plans kept changing with it. He knew that he had given into these circumstances, and though he had been concerned, he had been busy with other things. He had watched the events in France and waited for a time to act. Now it was too late. The nobles were leaving France by every road and highway, their property was being taken away or destroyed, and their family names were being erased. Darnay knew all of this as well as any of the people now ruling France knew it, and those people might hold him responsible for some of it.             

 But he hadnít hurt anyone, and he hadnít imprisoned anyone. He was so far from having cruelly forced the peasants to pay taxes to him that he had given up his social position of his own free will. Instead he had gone out into the world without the advantage of his title to earn a living for himself. Monsieur Gabelle had taken care of the poor and complex estate under written orders. He was told to spare the people, to give them what little there was leftówhatever fuel the tax collectors would let them have during the winter and whatever food was left during summer. He had put it all in writing so that there would be proof if he needed it now.             

 This started to persuade Charles Darnay that he needed to go back to Paris.          

 Yes. Like the   mariner in the old story The Rime of the Ancient Mariner by Samuel Coleridge  mariner in the old story , he was being pulled back as if to a magnet. He had to go back to France. Everything he thought of inspired him to move faster and more steadily toward France. He had been worried that bad people were making the situation bad in France. As someone who knew better than them, he should be there trying to stop the bloodshed and convincing them to be merciful and humane. With this uneasiness, half suppressed and half reprimanding him, he ended up comparing himself to Gabelle, the old gentleman who had been so dedicated to him. Immediately after this he thought of the sneers of his uncle, the monseigneur, which had stung him so badly, and Stryverís comments, which bothered him most of all. Then he thought of Gabelleís letter: the plea of an innocent prisoner who could be executed and have his justice, honor, and good name die with him.              

 He made his decision. He had to go to Paris.              

 Yes. The   Loadstone Rock magnetite or something that acts as a magnet  Loadstone Rock  was drawing him, and he had to go toward it until he returned to France. He didnít know that there was danger waiting for him there. He thought the people in France would happily understand the reason why he had done what he did once he arrived to explain himself. He thought of the good deed he had tried to do, which is often the optimistic illusion of many good people, and he saw himself as someone who could help to lead the Revolution that had gotten so out of control.              

 As he walked back and forth, having made his decision, he thought that neither Lucie nor her father should know about it until he had already left. Lucie should be spared the pain of saying goodbye, and her father, who was always reluctant to think about his past, should find it out as something that had already happened. He shouldnít have to deal with the suspense of not knowing whether Charles would go. Darnay wouldnít reflect on how much his doubts about going were because of her father. But Dr. Manetteís circumstances also affected his decision.              

 He walked back and forth thinking, until it was time to go back to Tellsonís and send off Mr. Lorry. As soon as he arrived in Paris he would find Mr. Lorry again, but he wouldnít say anything about his plans now.              

 A carriage with post horses was waiting at the door of the bank, and Jerry was there dressed and ready.              

 ìI have delivered that letter,î said Charles Darnay to Mr. Lorry. ìI wouldnít let him give me a written answer, but will you take a verbal answer?î             

 ìI will, happily,î said Mr. Lorry, ìif itís not dangerous.î             

 ìItís not dangerous at all, though it is to a prisoner at the Abbaye Prison.î             

 ìWhatís his name?î said Mr. Lorry. He had his pocketbook in his hand.             

 ìGabelle.î             

 ìGabelle. And what is the message to the unlucky prisoner Gabelle?î             

 ìItís simply that ëhe has received the letter and will come.íî             

 ìAt a specific time?î             

 ìHe will leave tomorrow night.î             

 ìAny particular person?î             

 ìNo.î             

 He helped Mr. Lorry wrap himself in several coats and cloaks and went out with him from the warm, old bank into the cold misty air of Fleet Street. ìGive my love to Lucie and little Lucie,î said Mr. Lorry, as they said goodbye. ìAnd take good care of them until I come back.î Charles Darnay shook his head and smiled uncertainly as the carriage rolled away.              

 It was the fourteenth of August, and that night Darnay sat up late and wrote two passionate letters. One was to Lucie, explaining his need to go to Paris and assuring her that he would not come to any harm there. The other letter was to the doctor, telling him to take care of Lucie and their daughter, and reassuring him as well that he would be fine. To both of them he wrote that he would send them letters to let them know he was safe as soon as he arrived.              

 It was hard being with them that day, with the first worries of their married life on his mind. It was hard to keep the secret that they had no suspicions of. But a loving look to his happy, busy wife convinced him not to tell her what was about to happen. (He had almost been moved to tell her; it was so strange to do anything without her quiet help). The day went by quickly, and early in the evening he embraced her and their daughter, pretending that he would come back soon (he told them he had an appointment and had to go out, and he had snuck out a suitcase full of clothes). Then he went out into the heavy mist in the streets with a heavy heart.              

 The magnet was drawing him quickly back to France now, and the winds and tides were heading toward it. He left his two letters with a trustworthy porter and told him to deliver them half an hour before midnight, but no sooner. He took a horse to Dover and started his journey. ìFor the love of Heaven, justice, generosity, and of the honor of your family name!î was what Gabelle, the poor prisoner, had said. Darnay recalled these words, which gave him strength as he left all that he loved on earth behind him, and sailed back toward France.          

 The end of Book Two.              

 It took a traveler a long time to go from England to Paris in the fall of 1792. There were many bad roads, bad carriages, and bad horses that would have delayed him, even though the king of France was still ruling on the throne in all of his glory. Now that the times had changed, there were even more obstacles. Citizen-patriots with their muskets ready to fire had taken over every town gate and village taxing-house. They would stop everyone as they came and went, question them, examine their papers, and look for their names on their lists. They would make them turn back or send them on their way, and sometimes they would stop them and seize them. It all depended on what their impulsive judgment led them to believe was best for the new Republic, which had the slogan, ìOne and Indivisible, with Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death.î             

 Charles Darnay had only traveled a few leagues into France when he began to notice that there was no hope of his going back until he had been declared a good citizen in Paris. Whatever might happen to him now, he had to continue on to his destination. He knew that every village and barrier he passed through was another obstacle between him and England. He was watched so carefully that he wouldnít have felt more like a prisoner even if he had been caught in a net, or were being sent to his destination in a cage.             

 Being watched so carefully not only meant that he was stopped on the highway twenty times during each leg of his journey, but he was also slowed down twenty times a day. People would follow him and then make him go back, or they would ride ahead of him and stop him, or ride with him and keep watch over him. He had been traveling in France for several days when he went to bed exhausted in a little town on a road still far away from Paris.              

 If he hadnít shown them poor Gabelleís letter from Abbaye Prison, he would not have gotten that far. He had so much trouble at the guardhouse in this small town that he thought he was in danger. Because of this he was especially surprised when he was woken up in the small inn where he was staying in the middle of the night.              

 A timid local official and three armed patriots with rough red caps and pipes in their mouths woke him. They sat down on the bed.              

 ìEmigrant,î said the official, ìI am going to send you to Paris with an escort.î             

 ìCitizen, I want nothing more than to get to Paris, though I donít need an escort.î             

 ìQuiet!î said one of the men in the red caps, hitting the bedcover with the handle of his musket. ìQuiet, aristocrat!î             

 ìWhat this man says is true,î said the timid official. ìYou are an aristocrat and so you need an escort. And you must pay us for it.î              

 ìI have no choice,î said Charles Darnay.             

 ìChoice! Listen to him!î yelled the same angry man in the red cap. ìAs if we werenít doing him a favor by keeping him from being hanged from a streetlamp!î             

 ìWhat this patriot says is always right,î said the official. ìGet up and get dressed, emigrant.î             

 Darnay did as he was told. He was taken back to the guardhouse where other patriots in rough red caps were smoking, drinking, and sleeping by a campfire. He paid them a great deal of money to be his escort, and then they started out on the wet roads at three oíclock in the morning.              

 The escort was made up of two patriots in red caps and three-colored   cockades an ornament worn on a hat as a badge  cockades . They were armed with muskets and sabers and rode along on horses on either side of him.              

 Charles Darnay controlled his own horse, but a loose rope was tied to the bridle. One of the escorts kept the end of the rope tied around his wrist. They headed out this way with the rain hitting their faces, clattering at a quick trot over the uneven paved street of the town and out onto the muddy roads. They occasionally changed horses or changed the pace at which they were traveling, but otherwise nothing changed during the whole muddy journey to Paris.              

 They traveled at night, stopping an hour or two after daybreak and waiting until twilight to start again. The escorts were dressed so poorly that they wrapped straw around their bare legs and their shoulders to keep from getting wet. Besides the inconvenience of having the escort, and the danger of one of the escorts always being drunk and carrying his musket in a reckless way, Charles Darnay didnít fear being treated as a captive. It had nothing to do with his particular situation, he thought. He hadnít explained why he was there yet, and he knew his story could be confirmed by Gabelle, the prisoner at the Abbaye Prison.              

 They came to the town of Beauvais in the evening. The streets were filled with people, and now Darnay couldnít help thinking that things looked upsetting. A threatening crowd gathered to see him dismount from his horse at the posting yard. Many people yelled out loudly, ìDown with the emigrant!î             

 He stopped as he was getting out of his saddle and decided that it was safer to stay on his horse.              

 ìYou call me an emigrant, my friends? Donít you see that Iím here in France by my own choice?î             

 ìYou are a cursed emigrant,î yelled a   farrier someone who makes horseshoes  farrier . The man rushed at him through the crowd waving his hammer in his hand. ìAnd you are a cursed aristocrat!î             

 The postmaster got between the man and the riderís bridle, which is what the man was apparently moving toward. He said soothingly, ìLeave him alone! He will be judged in Paris.î             

 ìJudged!î repeated the farrier, swinging his hammer. ìYes, and heíll be condemned as a traitor.î At this the crowd roared in approval.              

 The drunken escort sat calmly in his saddle watching with the rope around his wrist. Darnay looked at the postmaster, who was trying to turn the horseís head toward the yard. As soon as he could make himself heard, he said:             

 ìFriends, you are mistaken. Or you have been misinformed. I am not a traitor.î             

 ìHe lies!î yelled the farrier. ìHe is a traitor since they made the decree. His cursed life doesnít belong to him anymore. His life belongs to the people of France!î             

 Darnay saw hatred in the eyes of the crowd. In another moment they would have charged at him. The postmaster turned his horse into the yard. The escort rode close beside him, and the postmaster shut and barred the double gates. The farrier hit the gates with his hammer and the crowd groaned but did nothing else.              

 ìWhat decree was the smith talking about?î Darnay asked the postmaster after he had thanked him and stood next to him in the yard.              

 ìItís a decree for selling property of emigrants.î             

 ìWhen was it passed?î             

 ìOn the fourteenth.î             

 ìThatís the day I left England!î             

 ìEverybody says it is just one of many, and that there will be more decrees, if there arenít already, that will banish all emigrants and condemn them to death if they return. Thatís what he meant when he said your life is no longer your own.î             

 ìBut there are no decrees like that yet?î             

 ìI donít know,î said the postmaster, shrugging his shoulders. ìThere might be, or there will be. What difference does it make?î             

 They rested on some straw in a loft until the middle of the night, and then they continued riding on while all the townspeople were asleep. Darnay saw many changes in his former country that made his journey feel unreal, and one of the biggest was how little people slept. After riding for long, lonely periods of time over dreary roads, they would see a group of poor cottages that werenít dark like the others but were all lit up. They would find people gathered together like ghosts in the middle of the night. They would be in a circle, holding hands around a shriveled tree of liberty, or all gathered together singing a liberty song. Luckily, though, everyone was sleeping in Beauvais that night, so they were able to leave and continue on their lonely journey. Their horses jingled as they traveled through the unusually cold, wet night and among the poor fields that had given no crops that year. They saw blackened remains of houses that had been burned down. Sometimes they would suddenly be ambushed and have galloping toward them the patriot patrols that were watching all the roads.          

 At daylight they were finally at the walls of Paris. The barrier was closed and guarded by many men when they rode up to it.              

 ìWhere are the prisonerís papers?î asked a resolute-looking man in charge, who was called out by the guard.             

 Charles Darnay naturally noticed their use of the word     prisoner. He asked the man to recognize that he was a free traveler and a French citizen. He told him that the dangerous situation in the country made it necessary for him to travel with an escort, and that he had paid these men to escort him.              

 ìWhere are the prisonerís paper?î repeated the man, ignoring him.              

 The drunken patriot took Darnayís papers out of his cap. Looking over Gabelleís letter, the same man in charge seemed surprised. He looked at Darnay carefully.             

 He left Darnay and the escorts without saying a word and went into the guardroom. They sat on their horses and waited for him outside the gate. As he looked around while waiting anxiously, Charles Darnay saw that the gate was being guarded by a combination of soldiers and citizens, with citizens far outnumbering the soldiers. While the entrance into the city for peasants with carts full of supplies and other such traffic was easy to get though, the exit, even for the poorest peasants, was very difficult. A large group of men and women, not to mention animals and vehicles of various kinds, was waiting to leave. It took so long to check their identification that they moved through the barrier very slowly. Some of these people knew that they had so long to wait before they were questioned that they were lying on the ground sleeping or smoking. Others chatted together or hung around. Every man and woman wore a red cap and a three-colored cockade.              

 After Darnay had waited on his horse for half an hour noticing these things, the same man in charge came out and told the guard to open the barrier. Then he gave the drunken sober escorts a receipt for Darnay and asked Darnay to get down off his horse. He did so, and the two escorts, leading Darnayís tired horse, turned and rode away without entering the city.              

 He went with the guard into a guardroom. It smelled of wine and cigarette smoke, and there were several soldiers and citizens there, standing or lying around. Some were sleeping, some were awake, some were drunk, and some were sober. Some were in various states between asleep and awake, or drunk and sober. The light in the guardhouse came partly from the fading oil lamps and partly from the overcast day. Some books of lists were lying open on a desk, and a rough, dark-looking officer was in charge of these.             

 ìCitizen Defarge,î the officer said to the guard escorting Darnay as he took out a slip of paper to write on. ìIs this the emigrant Evremonde?î             

 ìThis is the man.î             

 ìHow old are you, Evremonde?î             

 ìThirty-seven.î             

 ìAre you married, Evremonde?î             

 ìYes.î             

 ìWhere were you married?î             

 ìIn England.î             

 ìOf course you were. Where is your wife, Evremonde?î             

 ìShe is in England.î             

 ìOf course she is. You will be sent to La Force Prison, Evremonde.î             

 ìBy Heaven!î exclaimed Darnay. ìUnder what law, and for what crime?î             

 The officer looked up from his slip of paper for a moment.             

 ìWe have new laws, Evremonde, and new crimes, since you were last in France.î He smiled cruelly as he said it and continued writing.             

 ìPlease know that I have come here by my own choice, in response to that letter you have in front of you. A fellow countryman begged me to return and help him. All I want is the chance to do so as soon as possible. Isnít that my right?î             

 ìEmigrants have no rights, Evremonde,î the man answered coldly. The officer finished writing. He read over to himself what he had written, sealed it, and handed it to Defarge, telling him, ìIn secret.î              

 Defarge gestured to Darnay with the paper that he had to follow him. Darnay obeyed, and two armed citizens went with them.              

 ìAre you the one who married the daughter of Dr. Manette, who was once a prisoner in the Bastille but was released?î asked Defarge quietly as they went down the guardhouse steps and walked out into the streets of Paris.              

 ìYes,î answered Darnay, with a surprised look.              

 ìMy name is Defarge. I own a wine shop in the Saint Antoine Quarter. Maybe you have heard of me.î             

 ìMy wife came to your house to take back her father? Yes!î             

 The word wife caused Defarge to say suddenly, ìIn the name of that new invention called the guillotine, why did you come back to France?î             

 ìYou heard me say it a minute ago. You donít believe itís the truth?î             

 ìItís a bad truth for you,î said Defarge, speaking with a frown and looking straight ahead.              

 ìTruly I feel lost here. Everything is so new, so different, so sudden and unjust, that I feel lost. Can you help me?î             

 ìNo.î Defarge kept looking straight ahead as he spoke.              

 ìWill you answer one question for me?î             

 ìMaybe. Depending on what it is. What is it?î             

 ìIn this prison that I am going to so unjustly, will I have some way of communicating with the outside world?î             

 ìYouíll see.î             

 ìAm I going to be shut up there without a trial or any chance to present my case?î             

 ìYouíll see. But, what then? Other people have been shut up in worse prisons before in the same way.î             

 ìBut not by me, Citizen Defarge.î             

 Defarge looked at him for an answer. He walked steadily on in silence, and the quieter he became, the less Darnay hoped that Defarge might soften. Therefore, he said quickly:             

 ìIt is very important to meóyou know even better than I do how important it isóthat I am able to tell Mr. Lorry of Tellsonís Bank that I have been thrown into La Force Prison. Mr. Lorry is an English gentleman who is in Paris right now. Will you be able to tell him for me?î             

 ìI will do nothing for you,î said Defarge, stubbornly. ìMy duty is to my country and its people. I have sworn to serve them against people like you. I will do nothing for you.î             

 Charles Darnay felt that it was hopeless to beg him anymore, and he was also too proud to do so. As they walked on in silence, he couldnít help noticing how the people seemed to be used to seeing prisoners moving through the streets. Even the children barely noticed him. A few people passing by turned to look at him, and a few shook their fingers at him for being an aristocrat. But otherwise, the fact that a well-dressed man was going to prison was no more special than if a man in work clothes should be going to work. In one narrow, dark, and dirty street that they passed through, an excited speaker was standing on a stool and speaking to an excited audience about crimes against the people of the king and the royal family. The few words that Charles Darnay heard the man say let him know that the king was in prison and that all the foreign ambassadors had left Paris. Except for when he had been in Beauvais, he had heard no news on the road. His escort and the fact that he was so closely watched had isolated him.             

 He knew now that France was a much more dangerous place for him currently than it had been when he had left England. He knew that danger had come upon him quickly and that things might get more and more dangerous for him. He had to admit to himself that he might not have come if he had known what would happen. And yet his concerns werenít as ominous as you would think, looking back on it from this happier time. Troubled as his future was, he didnít know his future. He knew so little about the coming massacreóa horrible massacre that would go on for days and nights and that would taint the gathering time of the harvest with bloodshedóit could have been a hundred thousand years away. The new invention of the guillotine was hardly known by name to him, or the people of France. The terrible things that would soon be done probably didnít even exist in the minds of the people who would do them yet. How could gentle people imagine such things?              

 He had expected to be treated harshly and possibly detained. He expected to miss his wife and child. But beyond this, he wasnít afraid of anything specific. These were his thoughts as he arrived at La Force Prison.              

 A man with a swollen face opened a small window in the door of the prison. Defarge told him, ìThis is the emigrant Evremonde.î             

 ìWhat the devil! How many more of them are there?î exclaimed the man with the swollen face.              

 Defarge ignored the manís comment and took a receipt from him. He left with the two citizen guards.             

 ìI say again, what the devil!î exclaimed the jailer to his wife. ìHow many more?î             

 The jailerís wife didnít have an answer for him. She merely said, ìYou have to have patience, my dear!î She rang a bell and three prison guards entered. They said the same thing, and one of them added the phrase ìFor the love of liberty,î which was a strange phrase to hear in a prison.             

 La Force Prison was a gloomy place. It was dark and filthy and had the horrible smell of foul sleep. It is extraordinary how soon the offensive smell of imprisoned sleep becomes apparent in places that are poorly cared for.          

 ìIn secret, too,î complained the jailer, reading the slip of paper. ìAs if the prison wasnít already full to bursting!î             

 He stuck the paper on a file angrily, and Charles Darnay waited for him for half an hour. Sometimes he would pace back and forth in the holding room, and sometimes he would sit on a stone seat. In either case, he stayed long enough that the chief and his staff remembered him.              

 ìCome!î said the chief, finally picking up his keys, ìcome with me, emigrant.î             

 Another guard took him through the dark corridors and staircases of the prison. Many doors clanged and locked behind them. Finally they came into a large, low room with vaulted ceilings. It was filled with men and women who were prisoners. The women were sitting at a long table, reading, writing, knitting, sewing, and embroidering. The men were mostly standing behind their chairs or wandering up and down the room.              

 Darnay withdrew from these people instinctively, associating prisoners with crime and disgrace. But the greatest unreality of his long ride was now their in front of him, as he saw the refinement and grace of these prisoners, who were all members of the upper class.              

 These refined manners seemed so out of place in the gloom of the prison that Charles Darnay felt as if he were surrounded by ghosts. These ghosts of beauty, stateliness, elegance, pride, frivolity, wit, youth, and age were all waiting here to leave earth. They all looked at him with eyes that had been changed by the death they had died in being imprisoned there.             

 He was so shocked he couldnít move. The jailer was standing at his side, and the other jailers were moving around. They would have looked nice enough under normal conditions, but they looked especially rough contrasted with the sad mothers and beautiful young daughters who were prisoners there: the ghosts of the young flirt, the young beauty and the genteel old woman. This contrast made the feeling that all normalcy had been turned upside down all the stronger. Surely, they were all ghosts. Surely, Darnayís long, strange journey through France was actually a disease that had killed him and brought him to these gloomy shades!             

 ìIn the name of this group of friends who have all faced the same misfortune, I have the honor of welcoming you to La Force Prison,î said a well-dressed and well-spoken gentleman as he came forward. ìI give you my sympathy for the disaster that has brought you here. May it all soon end happily! It would be rude to do so elsewhere, but it is not hereómay I ask, what is your name and title?î             

 Charles Darnay revived himself and told him the information as well as he could.             

 ìBut I hope that you were not brought here in secret?î said the gentleman as he watched the chief jailer move across the room as he spoke.              

 ìI donít understand the meaning of the phrase, but I heard them say that I was.î             

 ìAh, what a pity! Weíre sorry to hear that. But be brave. Several people that have been here were brought in secret at first and it didnít last long.î Then he raised his voice and spoke to the others. ìIím sorry to tell you all this, but he was brought here in secret.î             

 The group murmured sympathetically as Charles Darnay walked across the room to a grated door, where the jailer waited for him. Many voicesóamong which the soft and compassionate voices of women were noticeableógave him good wishes and encouragement. He turned at the grated door to thank them. The jailer closed the door, and he never saw the ghostlike people again.              

 The gate opened onto a stone staircase, leading upward. When they had climbed forty steps (Darnay, who had only been a prisoner for half an hour, already counted them), the jailer opened a low, black door, and they entered a lonely cell. It was cold and damp but was not dark.              

 ìThis is your cell,î said the jailer.              

 ìWhy am I locked up alone?î             

 ìHow do I know!î             

 ìCan I buy a pen, ink, and paper from you?î             

 ìThose were not my orders. You will be visited and can ask for them then, but for now you can only buy your food.î             

 In the cell there was a chair, a table, and a straw mattress. The jailer inspected these objects and the four walls before going out. Darnay had the thought as he leaned against the opposite wall that this jailer was so swollen, both in his face and his body, that he looked like a man who had drowned and filled with water. When the jailer was gone, he thought, ìNow Iíve been left for dead.î He stopped then and looked down at the mattress. He turned away from it feeling sick and thought, ìAnd here these crawling creatures are the first thing to happen to a body after death.î             

 ìFive paces wide by four and a half paces long,î Darnay thought over and over. He walked back and forth in his cell, measuring it. He could hear the sounds of Paris below him like muffled drums and voices. ìDr. Manette made shoes,î he thought over and over again. Darnay measured it again and walked faster to distract himself from the later thought. ìThe ghostlike figures that disappeared when the gate was closed. There was one woman in black among them, leaning in the window. There was light shining on her golden hair, and she looked like óó Letís ride on again, for Godís sake, through the lit-up villages when all the people are awake! óó He made shoes, he made shoes, he made shoes. óó Five paces by four and a half.î These bits of thought ran through his mind as Darnay walked faster and faster, stubbornly counting again and again. The sounds of Paris changed. They still sounded like muffled drums, but with the wail of voices he knew mixed in the swell of sound that rose above them.             

 The branch of Tellsonís Bank in the Saint Germaine Quarter of Paris was in one wing of a large house. It was accessible by a courtyard and closed off from the street by a high wall and strong gate. The house had belonged to a wealthy nobleman, who had lived in it until he fled Paris in his cookís clothes and snuck across the border. This man, who fled like an animal being chased by hunters, was the same monseigneur who had needed three strong servants plus his cook to serve him his chocolate.              

 Now the monseigneur was gone. The three former servants had made up for having worked for him by being more than ready and willing to cut his throat in the name of the Republic. The people had first taken control of the monseigneurís house, then took it away from him entirely. Things were changing so fast and decrees were announced so quickly that now, on September third, representatives of the new government had possession of monseigneurís house. They had marked it with the flag of the Republic and were drinking brandy inside.              

 If Tellsonís Bank in London had been like Tellsonís Bank in Paris, it would have driven the head of the bank crazy. What would the serious, respectable, responsible British men at Tellsonís have thought of the orange trees in boxes in the bankís courtyard, or the sculpture of Cupid that hung over the counter? But such things were in the Paris bank. Tellsonís had painted the Cupid white, but you could still see him on the ceiling. The figure was wearing linen and aiming his arrows at money, as love often does. In London, this Cupid, the mirror on the wall, and the young clerks who danced in public every chance they got would surely lead to the bankís failure. Yet, Tellsonís Bank in France prospered under these conditions. As long as things didnít get too out of hand in France, no one was concerned enough to withdraw his money.              

 That night, no man could say how much money would be drawn out of Tellsonís Bank in Paris, or how much would stay there, lost and forgotten. No man could say what plates and jewels would stay hidden in the bankís vaults while the owners of those items grew old in prison, or when those owners would die violently. No man could say how many accounts with Tellsonís would never be settled in this world, but carried into the next by their deceased owners. No man could answer these questions any more than Mr. Jarvis Lorry could, though he thought seriously about these things. He sat by a newly lit wood fire (it had turned cold early this year), and on his honest and brave face was a dark look of horror.              

 He was so dedicated to Tellsonís that he stayed in rooms in the bank. It made members of the bank feel secure to know that patriots occupied the main building, but the honest Mr. Lorry didnít think about that. He didnít care about these circumstances, only that he did his job. On the other side of the courtyard, under a row of columns, there was a good deal of room for carriages. Some of the monseigneurís carriages were still kept there. Against two of the pillars were fastened two large flaring torches, and in their light, standing out in the open, was a large   grindstone a stone used for sharpening  grindstone . It had been mounted there quickly and looked like it had been brought from some nearby blacksmith or other workshop. Mr. Lorry got up and looked out the window at these harmless objects. He shivered and went back to his seat by the fireplace. He had opened the window as well as the lattice blinds outside, and then closed them again. A chill passed through his body.              

 The usual sounds of the city at night could be heard from the streets past the high wall and the strong gate. Now and then an indescribable ring sounded among the noise of the city. It sounded weird and otherworldly, as if some unusual, terrible sounds were traveling up to Heaven.              

 ìThank God that no one that I care deeply about is in this awful city tonight,î said Mr. Lorry, clasping his hands. ìMay God have mercy on all those who are in danger!î             

 Soon afterward, the bell at the gate rang, and he thought, ìTheyíve come back!î He sat there, listening, but there was no loud noise of someone coming into the courtyard as he had expected. The gate clanged again, and then everything was quiet.              

 He felt nervous and fearful, and it made him worry about the security of the bank. It was well guarded, and he got up to move closer to the trusty people who were watching over it. Suddenly the door opened and two people rushed in. He fell back in shock when he saw them.              

 It was Lucie and her father! Lucie had her arms stretched out toward him. She had that same old look of intense concentration and concern on her face. It seemed like it had been stamped there for this one particular moment in her life.              

 ìWhat is this?î yelled Mr. Lorry, breathless and confused. ìWhatís the matter? Lucie! Dr. Manette! Whatís happened? Why are you here? What is it?î             

 She looked at him, pale and upset. She said, panting, ìOh my dear friend! Itís my husband!î             

 ìYour husband, Lucie?î             

 ìCharles.î             

 ìWhat about Charles?î             

 ìHe is here.î             

 ìHere in Paris?î             

 ìHeís been here for three or four days, I donít know how many exactly. I canít think straight. A errand of kindness brought him here. We didnít know he was coming. He was stopped at the barrier and sent to prison.î             

 Mr. Lorry cried out. Almost at the same moment, the bell at the front gate rang again and a loud noise of footsteps and voices could be heard entering the courtyard.              

 ìWhat is that noise?î asked Dr. Manette, going to the window.              

 ìDonít look!î yelled Mr. Lorry. ìDonít look out! Dr. Manette, donít touch the blind!î              

 The doctor turned toward him, with his hand on the window lock, and he said with a calm smile:             

 ìMy dear friend, I have a charmed life in this city. I have been a prisoner in the Bastille. There is no patriot in Paris or all of France who would touch me knowing I had been a prisoner there, unless it was to embrace me and carry me in triumph. My suffering has given me a power that got us safely through the barrier. It helped us obtain news of where Charles was and helped get us here. I knew that would be the case. I knew I could help Charles to safety. I told Lucie so. What is that noise?î His hand was on the window again.              

 ìDonít look!î yelled Mr. Lorry, desperately. ìNo, Lucie, my dear, you canít look either!î He put his arm around her and held her. ìDonít be so afraid. I swear I havenít heard anything about Charles being harmed. I didnít even suspect that he was here in Paris. Which prison is he in?î             

 ìLa Force!î             

 ìLa Force! Lucie, my child, if ever you were brave and helpful in your lifeóand I know that you have always been bothóyou will pull yourself together and do exactly what I tell you. More depends on it than you can think, or I can say. There is nothing you can do for him tonight, and you cannot go outside. Iím telling you this because what I have to ask you to do for Charles is the hardest thing to do at all. You have to listen and be calm and quiet. You must go into a room in the back here. You must leave your father and I alone for two minutes, and you must do it right now. Itís a matter of life and death.î              

 ìI will do what you tell me. I see in your face that you know I canít do anything else. I trust you.î             

 Mr. Lorry kissed her and brought her quickly into his room. He turned the key, and then he hurried back to the doctor. He opened the window and partly opened the blinds and put his hand on the doctorís arm. They both looked out into the courtyard.              

 They saw a crowd of men and women. There werenít enough of them to fill the courtyard. There werenít more than forty or fifty of them in all. The people who had possession of the house had let them in at the front gate, and they had rushed in to work at the grindstone. It had apparently been placed there for this purpose, as it was a convenient spot that was hidden away.              

 What awful people doing such awful work!             

 The grindstone had a double handle, and two men turned it madly. Their long hair flipped back when the whirling of the grindstone brought their faces up. Their faces were more horrible and cruel than the wildest savages in their most terrifying costumes. They wore false eyebrows and fake moustaches, and their ugly faces were covered with blood and sweat, and were contorted with howling. They were staring and glaring with excitement and lack of sleep. As they turned and turned the grindstone, their wet hair flung forward over their eyes, then backward over their necks. Some women brought wine to their mouths so they could drink, and with the blood and wine and the sparks coming off of the stone, the atmosphere seemed filled with gore and fire. Every person in the group had blood on him. Shoving past each other to be next at the grinding stone were shirtless men who had blood all over their arms and bodies, men in bloody rags, and men wearing stolen bits of womenís lace and silk and ribbon, all stained with blood. Hatchets, knives, bayonets, and swords were all brought to be sharpened and were covered in blood. Some of the swords were tied to peopleís wrists with strips of linen and pieces of dresses. They used different things to tie them, but they were all red with blood. As the people carrying these weapons pulled them out of the grindstoneís sparks and ran off into the streets, the same red color could be seen in their eyes. Any civilized watcher would have given twenty years of his life to kill the owners of those eyes.             

 All of this was seen in an instant, as if it were the vision of a drowning man, or the vision of any person seeing the world at a great turning point. They moved away from the window and the doctor looked at Mr. Lorryís pale face, hoping he would explain what they had seen.              

 ìTheyíre murdering the prisoners,î Mr. Lorry whispered, glancing fearfully around the locked room. ìIf youíre sure what you say is true, if you really have the power you think you haveóas I believe you doógo show yourself to these violent people and have them take you to La Force Prison. It may be too lateóI donít knowóbut go right this minute!î             

 Dr. Manette shook Mr. Lorryís hand and rushed out of the room without putting his hat on. He was in the courtyard when Mr. Lorry pulled the blinds back again and looked out the window.             

 His long white hair, his remarkable face, and his confidence allowed him to move right to the center of the group near the grindstone. He pushed their weapons aside as he walked through them, and for a few moments there was a pause. Then they started rushing around and talking. The doctor spoke, but Mr. Lorry couldnít hear what he was saying. Mr. Lorry saw him surrounded by all of them, in the middle of a line of twenty men. They were all linked shoulder to shoulder or hand to shoulder and were yelling, ìLong live the Bastille prisoner! Help the Bastille prisonerís family in La Force! Make room for the Bastille prisoner in front there! Save the prisoner Evremonde at La Force!î and thousands of other responses.              

 Mr. Lorry closed the lattice blind again. His heart was beating fast. He closed the window and the curtain and rushed to Lucie, and he told her that her father was being helped by the people and had gone to look for her husband. He found her daughter and Miss Pross there with her. It never occurred to him that seeing them there should have surprised him until much later, when he sat watching them in the relative quiet of the night.              

 By that time, Lucie had fallen asleep on the floor at his feet, still holding his hand. Miss Pross had laid the child down on Mr. Lorryís bed, where her head had gradually fallen onto the pillow next to Lucie. Oh, the long, long night, with Lucie crying out for her husband! Oh, the long night, with her father still gone and no word of how he was doing.             

 The bell at the front gate rang twice more during the night. Again a crowd of people rushed in and used the grindstone. ìWhat is it?î cried Lucie, frightened. ìQuiet! They sharpen the soldersí swords there,î said Mr. Lorry. ìThis house is national property now and is used as a kind of   armory a building in which weapons are stored  armory .î             

 It happened twice more, but the last time they came the crowd was smaller. Soon afterward, the sun began to come up. Mr. Lorry released himself softly from Lucieís grasp and cautiously looked out the window again. A man was getting up from the pavement beside the grindstone. He was so covered with blood that he looked like a badly wounded soldier, regaining consciousness on a battlefield covered with dead bodies. He looked around him with an empty stare. Soon the exhausted killer noticed one of the monseigneurís carriages in the weak daylight. He staggered over to the gorgeous vehicle, climbed into it, shut the door, and went to sleep on its dainty cushions.              

 It was later in the day when Mr. Lorry looked out the window again. The sun was shining red on the courtyard, and the grindstone was still standing there alone in the morning air, covered in blood that would never come off.             

 The next day, when business hours came around, one of the first things that occurred to the business-minded Mr. Lorry was that he had no right to endanger Tellsonís Bank by protecting the wife of an emigrant prisoner inside the bank. He would have risked his own belongings, safety, or life for Lucie without a second thought. But he was putting the bank at risk, not just himself, and as far as the bank was concerned, he was a strict businessman.              

 First, he thought about Defarge. He considered finding the wine shop again and getting Defargeís advice on the safest place to live in the chaotic city. But the same reason that made him want to ask Defarge also made him reject the idea. Defarge lived in the most violent quarter and was certainly deeply involved in what was happening there.              

 It was almost noon. Since the doctor hadnít returned yet, and since every minute he was missing was a threat to Tellsonís Bank, Mr. Lorry worked out a plan with Lucie. She said that her father had talked about renting a place to live for a short period of time in that quarter near the bank. As renting a place didnít threaten Tellsonís at allóand as they would certainly have to stay some time, since even if Charles were released he wouldnít be allowed to leaveóMr. Lorry went out to look for such a place. He found an acceptable one high up in a removed side street, where the closed blinds in all the other windows marked the homes as deserted.             

 He immediately brought Lucie, her child, and Miss Pross to this apartment. He gave them as much comfort as he could, and more comfort than he allowed himself. He left Jerry with them to guard the doorway and went back to his own business. He continued to worry about them as the day dragged on.              

 The day passed slowly, and tired him out, until the bank finally closed. Once again he was alone in his room from the night before. He was thinking about what to do next when he heard footsteps on the stairs. In a few moments, a man stood in front of him. The man looked at Mr. Lorry closely and called him by name:             

 ìI am your servant,î said Mr. Lorry. ìDo you know me?î             

 The man was strong and had dark, curly hair. He was between forty-five and fifty years old. He answered by repeating the words exactly the same way:             

 ìDo you know me?î             

 ìI have seen you somewhere.î             

 ìMaybe at my wine shop?î             

 Very interested and excited, Mr. Lorry said, ìYou were sent by Dr. Manette?î             

 ìYes. I was sent by Dr. Manette.î             

 ìAnd what does he say? What information did he send me?î             

 Defarge handed him a scrap of paper. It was written in the doctorís handwriting:             

 ìCharles is safe, but I cannot leave here safely yet. I have convinced them to let Charles write a short note to Lucie. Let Defarge see Lucie.î             

 It was dated from La Force Prison within the past hour.             

 ìWill you go with me to see his wife?î said Mr. Lorry, happy and relieved after reading the note out loud.              

 ìYes,î answered Defarge.              

 Mr. Lorry had not yet noticed how strangely reserved and mechanical Defarge was when he spoke. Mr. Lorry put on his hat and they went out into the courtyard. There, they found two women, one of them knitting.             

 ìYou are Madame Defarge, of course!î said Mr. Lorry. She had looked exactly the same as she had seventeen years ago.              

 ìIt is she,î said Monsieur Defarge.              

 ìIs Madame Defarge going with us?î asked Mr. Lorry, noticing that she was moving along with them.             

 ìYes. She is going so she can see their faces and recognize them. It is for their safety.î             

 Mr. Lorry was starting to notice the odd way Defarge was behaving. Mr. Lorry looked doubtfully at him and led the way, and both of the women followed them. The second woman was The Vengeance.             

 They walked through the streets as quickly as they could and climbed the staircase to the new house. Jerry let them in and they found Lucie crying alone. She was overjoyed by the news Mr. Lorry gave her about Charles, and she grasped Defargeís hand, the one in which he was carrying the note. She didnít realize that Defarge might have been killing prisoners with those same hands that night, and might have killed Charles if they hadnít been so lucky.              

 The note said, ìMy dearest. Be brave. I am doing well, and your father is able to influence the people here. You cannot answer this letter. Kiss Little Lucie for me.î             

 That was all he had written, but it meant so much to Lucie that she turned from Defarge to Madame Defarge and kissed one of her hands. It was a passionate, loving, thankful, womanly thing to do. But Madame Defarge didnít respond at all. She just dropped her hand coldly and went back to knitting.              

 There was something about Madame Defargeís touch that made Lucie freeze. She stopped as she was putting the note in her bosom, and with her hands near her neck, she gave Madame Defarge a terrified look. Madame Defarge looked back at her with a cold, emotionless stare.              

 ìMy dear,î said Mr. Lorry, jumping in to explain. ìThere are often uprisings in the streets. And, although it is unlikely that they will bother you, Madame Defarge wants to come with us so she can see those she might be able to protect, what they look like, to identify them. I believe Iím correct, yes, Citizen Defarge?î said Mr. Lorry. He said these reassuring words rather tentatively, as he saw the serious manner of Defarge and the women.              

 Defarge looked gloomily at his wife. His only answer was a grunt of agreement.             

 ìLucie, youíd better leave your daughter and Miss Pross here,î said Mr. Lorry, doing all he could to appease them. ìMiss Pross is an English lady and doesnít know any French,î he told Defarge.             

 Miss Pross, who strongly believed she could handle any foreigner, wasnít shaken or upset by being in a dangerous situation. She came in with her arms crossed and said in English to The Vengeance, whom she saw first, ìWell, I am sure, Boldface! I hope you are doing well!î She also coughed at Madame Defarge in a British manner. Neither one of them paid much attention to her, though.              

 ìIs that Darnayís child?î asked Madame Defarge. She stopped knitting for the first time and pointed her knitting needle at Little Lucie as if it were the finger of Fate.              

 ìYes, madame,î answered Mr. Lorry. ìThis is our poor prisonerís darling daughter and his only child.î             

 The shadow of Madame Defarge and the other two fell on little Lucie in such a dark and threatening manner that her mother instinctively knelt down on the ground next to her and held her to her chest. The shadow seemed to fall on both the mother and her child.              

 ìThatís enough, husband,î said Madame Defarge. ìI have seen them. We can go.î             

 But her behavior was menacing enoughónot in an obvious way, but hiddenóto frighten Lucie. She took Madame Defargeís dress in her hand and said:             

 ìYou will be good to my poor husband. You wonít hurt him. You will help me see him if you can?î             

 ìYour husband is not my business here,î answered Madame Defarge, looking down at her calmly. ìIt is you, Dr. Manetteís daughter, that is my concern.î             

 ìFor my sake, then, be merciful to my husband. For the sake of my daughter! She will pray that you are merciful to Charles. We are more afraid of you than we are of these others.î             

 Madame Defarge took it as a compliment and looked at her husband. Defarge, who had been biting his thumbnail nervously and looking at her, set his face in a stern expression.             

 ìWhat did your husband say in that little letter?î asked Madame Defarge, smiling. ìInfluence. Something about influence?î             

 ìThat my father has a lot of influence on the people around him,î said Lucie. She took the paper quickly from her breast without looking away from Madame Defarge.              

 ìSurely his influence will get Charles released!î said Madame Defarge. ìLet it!î             

 ìAs a wife and a mother,î cried Lucie sincerely, ìI beg you to take pity on me. Donít use any of your power against my innocent husband, but use it to help him. Oh, my sister and fellow woman, think of me. I am a wife and a mother!î             

 Madame Defarge looked as coldly as ever at the pleading woman, and turning to her friend The Vengeance, said:              

 ìThe wives and mothers we used to see, since we were as young as your daughter and much younger, have not been thought of. We have seen their husbands and fathers sent to prison and kept away from them enough times. All our lives we have seen our fellow women and their children suffer. They have suffered from poverty, nakedness, hunger, thirst, sickness, misery, oppression, and neglect of all kinds.î             

 ìWeíve seen nothing else,î answered The Vengeance.             

 ìWe have endured this for a long time,î said Madame Defarge, looking at Lucie again. ìJudge you! Is it likely that the suffering of one wife and mother would matter much to us now?î             

 Madame Defarge went back to her knitting and left. The Vengeance followed. Monsieur Defarge went out last and closed the door.              

 ìBe brave, my dear Lucie,î said Mr. Lorry, picking her up off the ground. ìBe brave! So far, all is going well. Itís going much, much better than it has for many less fortunate people. Cheer up, and be thankful.î             

 ìI am not ungrateful, I hope, but that terrible woman has thrown a dark shadow on my hopes.î             

 ìTut, tut!î said Mr. Lorry. ìWhy are you so sad? A shadow? Really? But there is no substance to a shadow, Lucie.î             

 But the way the Defarges were acting had thrown a shadow on him too, and what they had said secretly bothered him very much.             

 Dr. Manette didnít come back until one morning four days later. Lucie was kept from knowing so much of what had happened during that terrible period that it wasnít until much later, when she had been away from France for a long time, that she learned eleven hundred defenseless prisonersóboth male and female and of all agesóhad been killed by the people. This horrible deed had gone on for four days and nights, while the dead bodies had poisoned the air around her. She only knew that there had been an attack on the prisons and that all of the political prisoners had been in danger. She knew that some of them had been dragged out of the prisons by the crowd and killed.              

 Swearing Mr. Lorry to secrecy, Dr. Manette informed him that the crowd had taken him through the bloodshed in the streets to La Force Prison. There he had found a self-appointed   tribunal a court of justice  tribunal  holding trials in the prison. The prisoners were brought in front of the tribunal one-by-one, and the tribunal would quickly decide if they should be killed, released, or, in a few cases, brought back to their cells. The people accompanying him had presented Dr. Manette to the tribunal. He had told them his name and his profession and that he had spent eighteen years as a secret prisoner at the Bastille who had never been officially accused of anything. One of the tribunal members stood up and identified him. This man was Defarge.              

 Dr. Manette told Mr. Lorry that he had learned from the lists on the table that Charles was one of the prisoners who was still alive. Dr. Manette had begged the tribunal to let Charles live. Some of the men on the tribunal were asleep, some were awake, some were covered in blood and some were clean, some were sober and some were drunk. He told them that the people had granted him the right, as a sufferer under the now-defeated justice system, to have Charles Darnay brought in front of the tribunal and examined. It seemed that Charles was about to be released when his luck came to a stop. The doctor couldnít understand why. The members of the tribunal then spoke a few words to each other in secret. The man acting as president of the tribunal then told Dr. Manette that the prisoner had to stay in custody, but for the doctorís sake he would be kept safe. Then, on a signal, Charles was taken inside the prison again. The doctor had begged for permission to stay and make sure that Charles wasnít, through malice or bad luck, taken out to the violent crowd outside the gate. Their murderous yells often drowned out the court proceedings. Dr. Manette had been allowed to stay and had stayed there in the courtroom until the danger was over.              

 The things he saw there between his brief meals and sleep will remain untold. The intense celebration when a prisoner was saved didnít surprise him any less than the intense rage toward those who were sentenced to death and cut to pieces. Dr. Manette said one prisoner there had been set free into the street, only to be mistakenly stabbed with a pike as he went out. The crowd begged the doctor to go tend to his wound, and he had gone out to him from the same gate. He found the man in the arms of a group of volunteers. They were sitting on top of the bodies of people they had killed. They helped the doctor and took care of the wounded man with gentle concern. Their helpful behavior was so inconsistent that it was as disturbing as anything else in that awful nightmare. They made a stretcher for him and carried him carefully away, and then they picked up their weapons again and went back to killing people so terribly that the doctor covered his eyes with his hands and passed out in the middle of it.              

 As Mr. Lorry listened, and as he watched the face of his friend who was now sixty-two years old, he started to worry that these terrible experiences might cause a relapse of his old dangerous condition.              

 But he had never seen Dr. Manette as he currently was. He had never known him the way he was now. For the first time, Dr. Manette felt that his suffering in the Bastille had given him strength and power. For the first time, he felt that in prison he had slowly gained the strength and skills that would free his daughterís husband and bring him to safety. ìIt will all pay off in the end, my friend,î said Dr. Manette. ìIt wasnít a terrible waste. As my daughter, Lucie, helped me recover, I will help bring her husband back to her. With the help of Heaven, I will do it!î Jarvis Lorry saw the fire in his eyes and the determined look on his face. He had the calm, strong appearance of a man whose life seemed to have been put on hold for so many years, then started up again with an energy that had been hidden until it was now useful. Mr. Lorry believed him.              

 The doctor felt determined to such a degree that he could have conquered greater obstacles than the ones he now faced. He kept working as a doctor, whose business was with all types of peopleóprisoners and free people, rich and poor, bad and good. He used his influence so well that he was soon the official doctor for three prisons, including La Force. He could now tell Lucie that her husband was no longer imprisoned alone, but was mixed in with the main prison population. He saw her husband once a week, and he brought messages to her that Charles spoke to him directly. Sometimes Charles himself wrote a letter to her, though the doctor was never the one who delivered it. Lucie wasnít allowed to write to him, though, because many suspected that there were plots being developed in the prisons, especially involving emigrants who had made friends or met important people abroad.              

 The new life of Dr. Manette was very stressful. Still, the wise Mr. Lorry saw that he took pride in it. Nothing unappealing tainted this pride. It was natural for him to be proud, and he deserved it. But Mr. Lorry thought it was strange. Dr, Manette knew that until then, his daughter and Mr. Lorry had associated his imprisonment with his personal suffering and weakness. Now this had changed. He knew that his suffering in the Bastille had given him the power to save Charles and get him back to safety. He was in high spirits about the change. He was a leader now, and his daughter and Mr. Lorry were the weak ones trusting in his strength. The relationship between Lucie and him had been reversed. But only the way the most intense gratitude and affection could reverse them. He couldnít have taken any pride in anything but helping her in some way after she had helped him so much. ìItís strange to see,î thought Mr. Lorry in his friendly and smart way, ìbut it is right. So, take the lead, my dear friend, and stay in charge. We couldnít be in better hands.î             

 The doctor never stopped trying to get Charles set free or at least brought to trial, but the public opinion of the time was too strong for him to fight against. The new era had begun. The king was tried, convicted, and had his head cut off. The Republic of ìLiberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Deathî was ready to be victorious and kill anyone who was against them. A black flag flew day and night from the tall towers of Notre Dame. Three hundred thousand men rose up against their oppressors. They rose up all over France, as if they were growing out of the earth. They came from hills and plains, rock, gravel, and mud. They came from the South and the North, from fields and forests, from vineyards and olive fields. They came from the trimmed grass, cornfields, the lush farmland near the rivers, and the sandy beaches. What single person could compete with the storm rising during the first year after of the Revolution? This storm was coming up from the ground instead of falling from the sky. Instead of a storm falling from Heaven, Heaven wanted nothing to do with this storm.              

 The violence didnít stop, let up, or quiet down. People lost track of time. Days and nights blended together. It was like the beginning of time when there were only the morning and night of the first day and no other time existed. The furious people of France lost track of time the way a fever patient does. Now, breaking the cityís unnatural silence, the executioner cut off the head of the king and showed it to the people. Almost immediately after he showed them the head of his wife, the queen. She had spent eight months suffering in prison after her husband died, turning her hair gray.              

 But because such times bring contradictions with them, the time felt long, though it moved so quickly. There was a revolutionary tribunal set up in the capital. There were also forty or fifty thousand revolutionary committees all over the country. These committees enacted a Law of the Suspected, which removed any assurance of freedom or safety and allowed any good, innocent person to be accused by any bad, guilty one. The prisons filled up with innocent people who couldnít get their cases heard. These things became the established order and seemed to have been around since ancient times before they were even a few weeks old. Above all, the guillotine grew so familiar to everyone that it seemed like it had been around since the beginning of the world.              

 It was popular in jokes. People joked that it was the best cure for a headache, that it always kept the hair from turning gray, that it refined the complexion. It was the National Razor that gave you a close shave. People joked that you kissed the guillotine, looked through the little window, and sneezed into the sack. It was a sign of the rebirth of the human race and took the place of the Christian cross. Models of the guillotine were worn on necklaces that used to have crosses on them. People now bowed down and worshipped the guillotine and rejected the cross.              

 It cut off so many heads that it was stained red along with the ground underneath it. It was taken apart and put together again when it was needed, like a puzzle for a terrible young child. It silenced those who spoke well, knocked down those who were powerful, and eliminated those who were beautiful and good. It had cut off the heads of twenty-two respectable peopleótwenty-one of them were alive and one was already deadówithin twenty-two minutes on one morning. The executioner who operated it had been nicknamed Samson after the strong man of the Old Testament. But with the guillotine, he was stronger than Samson, and more blind, and he tore down the gates of Godís own temple every day.              

 Dr. Manette moved through these dangers and among the dangerous people with a clear head. He was confident and remained cautiously persistent. He never doubted that he would eventually save Charles Darnay. Yet, time passed so quickly that Charles had now been in prison for a year and three months. That December, the Revolution had grown so much more violent and out of control that the rivers in the south of France were filled with bodies of people who had been drowned at night, and prisoners were shot in groups in broad daylight. Still, Dr. Manette viewed all these terrors with a clear head. There was no one as well known in Paris at the time and no one in a stranger situation. He was quiet, kind, and essential in the hospitals and prisons, and he treated killers and victims the same. He was neutral, and when he was treating patients, the fact that he had once been a prisoner in the Bastille set him apart from everyone else. He was not suspected or questioned any more than he would have been if he really had been brought back to life eighteen years earlier and was a ghost wandering among the living.              

 Charles had been in prison for one year and three months. During that time, Lucie never knew from one hour to the next if the guillotine would cut off his head the next day. Every day, carts filled with condemned prisoners rumbled through the streets. Beautiful girls; attractive women with brown, black, or gray hair; young men and women; sturdy old men; nobles and peasants all went to bleed at the guillotine. Every day they were brought from the dark cellars of the prisons to the light of the outdoors and brought through the streets to satisfy the guillotineís thirst. Of the Revolutionís slogan, ìLiberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death,î the last one, ìdeath,î was the easiest to impart. O guillotine!              

 If the suddenness of Lucieís misfortune, and the chaos of the time, had stunned her into waiting for Charlesís release in idle despair, she would have been like many others in her situation. But since she had first found her father in the attic in Saint Antoine, she had always been committed to her responsibilities. She was even more committed now, as all who are quietly loyal and good always are.              

 As soon as they settled into their new house and Dr. Manette had fallen into his routine of treating patients, she arranged the little household just as if her husband had been there. Everything had its place and time, and she taught Little Lucie as regularly as if they had all been together in their home in London. To trick herself into believing she and Charles would soon be reunited, she used little devices, such as the preparations made for his quick return, and the fact that his chair and books were set aside waiting for him. These devices, and the prayer she said at night for all the poor people who were in prison and in danger, especially Charles, were the only things that relieved her worried mind.              

 Her appearance did not change much. The plain, dark dresses that she and little Lucie wore looked like mourning dresses, but they were as neat and well treated as the brighter clothes they wore during happier times. She was paler now, and the old, intense expression on her forehead was constantly on her face, not an occasional thing anymore. Otherwise, she still looked very attractive. Sometimes, at night when she kissed her father, she would burst into tears after having hidden her feelings all day. She would tell him that he was the only thing on earth she could depend on. He always answered determinedly, ìNothing can happen to Charles without my knowing about it, and I know that I can save him, Lucie.î              

 They had only been living this new life of theirs for a few weeks when, upon coming home one night, her father said to her:              

 ìMy dear, there is a window high up in the prison that Charles can sometimes look out of at three in the afternoon. When he can get to itówhich depends on many uncertain thingsóhe thinks he might be able to see you in the street if you stood in a specific place. Iíll show you where it is. But you will not be able to see him. And even if you could, it wouldnít be safe for you to make any signs or gestures to each other.î             

 ìOh, show me the place, Father, and I will go there every day.î             

 From that point on she waited there for two hours every day, no matter what the weather was. When the clock struck two she would be there, and at four oíclock she would walk away resignedly. When the weather allowed she would bring Lucie with her, and at other times she would go alone. But she never missed a single day.              

 The place where she would stand was a dark and dirty corner of a small, winding street. The small hut of a   wood sawyer a person who saws wood for a living  wood sawyer , who sawed logs into pieces for firewood, was the only house at that end of the street. The rest of the street was enclosed by walls. On the third day Lucie was there, the wood sawyer noticed her.              

 ìGood day, citizeness.î             

 ìGood day, citizen.î             

 This way of addressing people was now required by law. It had started as something the more passionate patriots did by choice some time ago, but now everyone was required to do it.              

 ìI see youíre walking here again, citizeness?î             

 ìYou see that I am, citizen!î             

 The wood sawyer was a little man who gestured too much. He had once been a repairer of roads. He looked at the prison and pointed to it. He put his ten fingers in front of his face to represent prison bars and peeked through them playfully.              

 ìBut itís none of my business,î he said, going back to sawing wood.              

 The next day he was waiting for her and approached her as soon as she appeared.              

 ìWhat? Youíre walking here again, citizeness?î             

 ìYes, citizen.î             

 ìAh! And you brought a child too! This is your mother, isnít it, my little citizeness?î              

 ìShould I say yes, Mamma?î little Lucie whispered to her mother, pulling close to her.              

 ìYes, dearest,î said Lucie.              

 ìYes, citizen,î little Lucie said to the wood sawyer.             

 ìAh! But itís none of my business. My work is my business. Look at my saw! I call it my little guillotine. La la la, la la la! And off goes his head!î             

 Part of the piece of the wood fell off as he spoke, and he threw it into a basket.              

 ìI call myself the Samson of the firewood guillotine. Look again!î He sang as he cut another piece of wood. ìLoo loo loo, loo loo loo! And off goes     her head! Now Iíll do a child. Tickle, tickle, pickle, pickle! And off goes the childís head. A whole family!î             

 Lucie shuddered as he threw two more pieces of wood into his basket, but it was impossible to be there while the wood sawyer was working nearby without him seeing her. Therefore, to keep him happy, she always spoke to him first. Often she would give him money for drinks, which he took happily.              

 He was a curious man. Sometimes when she had completely forgotten about him and was looking at the prison roof and grates thinking of her husband, she would realize that the wood sawyer was looking at her. His knee would be on his bench and his saw would have stopped moving. ìBut itís none of my business!î he would usually say when this happened, and then he would quickly go back to work again.          

 No matter what the weather was, Lucie spent two hours of every day at this place. In the snow and frost during winter, the strong winds during spring, the hot sunshine of summer, or the rains of autumn, Lucie would be there. Then she would be back again in the snow and frost of winter. Every day when she left she would kiss the prison wall. Her father told her that her husband only saw her once every five or six times she went. Sometimes it was two or three times in a row. Sometimes it wasnít for a week or two. It was enough that he saw her when he got the chance. If there were even a chance of him seeing her, she would have spent the whole day there seven days a week.              

 She continued to do this until December. Meanwhile, her father moved among all the terrible events happening with a cool head. One afternoon, when it was snowing lightly, Lucie arrived at her usual corner. It was a day when people were celebrating and there was a festival. As she walked through the streets she noticed that the houses were decorated with little pikes that had little red caps stuck on them. They were also decorated with three-colored ribbons, and had the standard slogan of the Republic (many in three-colored letters), ìOne and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!î              

 The wood sawyerís gloomy little shop was so small that this slogan hardly fit on it. He had gotten somebody to write it for him who had barely been able to squeeze in the word death. On his rooftop he had placed a cap on a pike, as all good citizens were expected to do, and he had placed his saw in one window with the words ìLittle Saint Guillotineî written on it, for now people referred to the guillotine as ìSaint Guillotine.î His shop was closed and he wasnít there, and Lucie was relieved to be left alone.              

 But the wood sawyer wasnít far away. Soon Lucie heard people hurrying toward her and shouting, and she was frightened. A moment later a crowd of people came rushing around the corner by the prison wall. The wood sawyer was in the middle of them, hand-in-hand with the woman known as The Vengeance. There were at least five hundred people there, and they were dancing like five thousand devils. Their own singing was their only music. They danced to the popular song of the Revolution, and the way they kept in time sounded like they were all gnashing their teeth in unison. Men and women danced together. Women danced with women, men danced with men, and people danced with whomever they ended up close to. At first the crowd was made up of red caps and rough wool rags, but as they filled the street and started dancing around Lucie, a terrible, ghostlike figure started dancing above them. They moved forward, then back, and they slapped each otherís hands and grabbed each otherís heads. They spun around by themselves or caught each other and spun around in pairs. They did this until many of them dropped to the ground. While those people were on the ground, the rest of them joined hands and all spun around together, and then the ring broke and they formed separate rings of two and four people. They spun and spun until they all stopped at the same time. Then they started up again, hit each other, grabbed at each other, tore at each other, and then started spinning in the opposite direction. Suddenly they stopped again. They paused and started anew, forming into lines that were as wide as the street. Then they ran off screaming with their heads bowed low and their hands high in the air. No fight could have been half as terrifying as this dance was. It was so much like an evil sportósomething that had once been innocent that was now evilóa healthy pastime that had been changed into something used to excite people and incite them to violence. The parts of it that looked graceful made it even more ugly as it showed how all good things had turned perverse and terrible. The young maidenís bosom, or the pretty young girlís head, or the delicate foot involved in this terrible dance were the types of things that marked this disjointed time.             

 The dance was called the Carmagnole. As it passed, leaving Lucie frightened and confused in the doorway of the wood-sawyerís house, the snow fell quietly. It lied white and soft on the ground as if the dance had never happened.              

 Lucie had covered her eyes with her hand for a moment, and when she looked up Dr. Manette stood before her. ìOh, Father! This was a cruel, terrible sight to see.î             

 ìI know, my dear. I know. I have seen it many times. Donít be frightened! None of them would ever hurt you.î             

 ìIím not frightened for myself, Father, but when I think of Charles, and these merciless peopleóî             

 ìWe will get him safely away from these people soon. When I left he was climbing to the window. I came to tell you. You werenít here for him to see. Blow a kiss toward that roof at the top.î             

 ìIíll do it, Father, and I send him my soul with it.î             

 ìYou canít see him, my poor dear?î             

 ìNo, Father,î said Lucie. She was crying longingly as she kissed her hand. ìNo.î             

 They heard footsteps in the snow. It was Madame Defarge. Dr. Manette greeted her. ìI salute you, citizeness,î he said. She answered, ìI salute you, citizen.î She said it as she passed, and she said nothing more. Then she was gone, like a shadow over the snow-covered street.             

 ìGive me your arm, my love. Leave here looking cheerful and brave for your husbandís sake. That is the best thing you can do.î They left the spot. ìAll of this wonít be for nothing. Charles is going before the court tomorrow.î             

 ìTomorrow!î             

 ìThere is no time to lose. I am well prepared, but we need to take precautions. These steps could not be taken until he was actually summoned before the tribunal. He hasnít received the notice yet, but I know that he will soon be summoned for tomorrow and taken to the   Conciergerie a former palace and prison in Paris where prisoners were tried  Conciergerie . I have recent information. Youíre not afraid, are you?î             

 She almost couldnít answer. ìI trust you.î             

 ìYou must trust me completely. Your waiting is almost over, my darling. He will be returned to you within a few hours. I have done everything I can to protect him, and now I must see Mr. Lorry.î             

 He stopped. There was the sound of heavy wheels nearby. They both knew too well what the sound meant. They counted: one, two, three. Three carts bringing prisoners to the guillotine, moving over the snow.             

 ìI must see Mr. Lorry,î repeated the doctor, turning the other way.              

 Mr. Lorry was still at the bank. He had never left it. He and his records were in frequent demand regarding property that had been taken away from its owners and given to the state. He saved what he could for the owners. There was no better man alive to be trusted to take care of Tellsonís property, and to keep quiet.             

 The sky turned a murky red and yellow, and a mist rose up from the Seine River. Night was coming, and it was almost dark when they arrived at Tellsonís Bank. The elegant former home of the monseigneur was wrecked and empty. Above a pile of dust and ashes in the courtyard was a sign that said ìNational Property. Republic One and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!î             

 Someone was with Mr. Lorry who Dr. Manette couldnít see. Who was it? His riding coat was on the chair. Who had he been talking to when Mr. Lorry came out, nervous and surprised, to embrace Dr. Manette? To whom did he repeat Lucieís words when he raised his voice, turned toward the door of the room he had just come from, and said, ìHeís been taken to the Conciergerie and goes on trial tomorrow.î             

 The dreaded tribunal was made up of five judges, a public prosecutor, and a selected jury. The court was in session every day, and their lists were sent out every night. The jailers in the various prisons read the lists out loud to their prisoners. They would often make a joke of it and say, ìCome out and listen to the evening paper, you prisoners!î             

 ìCharles Evremonde, also known as Darnay!î             

 This is how the ìevening paperî began at La Force Prison.             

 When someoneís name was called, the person would step forward into an area reserved for him. Charles Evremonde, also known as Darnay, already knew this. He had seen hundred of people go to their deaths this way.              

 The swollen jailer, who wore reading glasses, glanced over them to make sure Darnay had stepped forward, and then went through the rest of the list. He would pause briefly after each name to make sure the person stepped forward. There were twenty-three names, but only twenty people answered. One of the prisoners whose names was called had already died in jail and been forgotten. Two had already been sent to the guillotine and also forgotten. The jailer read the list in the hall with the vaulted ceilings where Darnay had seen the group of prisoners the night he arrived in prison. Every one of those prisoners had died in the massacre. Every person he had since cared about in prison had died at the guillotine.              

 People quickly said goodbyes and kind words to those whose names were called, but this was over soon. This happened every day, and the prisoners of La Force Prison were busy preparing for some games and a concert that night. They crowded toward the prison grates and cried there, but twenty people in the games and concert now had to be replaced. Soon they would be locked up and guard dogs would be patrolling the common rooms and hallways during the night. The prisoners werenít unsympathetic or heartless. Their behavior came from the conditions in which they lived. In a similar way, though with a subtle difference, a type of excitement or intoxication was known to have led some people to die at the guillotine unnecessarily. It wasnít simply boastfulness. It was as if the public were all infected and had gone mad. When there is a plague some people will be secretly attracted to the disease and will want to die of it. All of us have similar strange desires in our hearts that are only waiting for the right circumstances to reveal themselves.              

 The passageway to the Conciergerie was short and dark. The night was cold and passed slowly in the rat-infested cells. The next day, fifteen prisoners were brought in front of the tribunal before Charles Darnayís name was called. All fifteen were sentenced to death. The trials of all of them together only took an hour and a half.              

 ìCharles Evremonde, also known as Darnay,î was finally brought before the court.              

 The presiding judges wore feathered hats, but the rough red cap and three-colored cockade of the Revolution was what most other people wore. Looking at the jury and the rowdy audience, it seemed that the usual order of things had been reversed. It looked like the criminals were trying the honest men. The lowest, meanest, worst peopleóof a city filled with low, mean, bad peopleówere in charge. The crowd was commenting loudly, applauding, talking amongst themselves, and influencing the outcome of the trial nonstop. Most of the men were armed in one way or another, and some of the women had knives or daggers on them. Some of them ate and drank as they watched, and many of them knitted. Among the women knitting, there was one woman who had a spare piece of knitting under her arm as she worked. She was in the front row next to a man whom Darnay hadnít seen since he first arrived at the barrier into Paris. He remembered that the man was Defarge. Darnay noticed that the woman had whispered in his ear once or twice and that she seemed to be his wife. But what he noticed most about the two of them was that, although they were as close to him as someone could get, they never looked at him. They seemed to be waiting for something intently. They looked at the jury, but they didnít look anywhere else. Dr. Manette sat next to the president of the tribunal, dressed modestly as usual. As far as Darnay could tell, Dr. Manette and Mr. Lorry were the only men there who werenít part of the tribunal. They wore their usual clothes and were not wearing the Revolutionary costume of the red cap and three colors.             

 The public prosecutor accused Charles Evremonde, also known as Darnay, of being an emigrant. The prosecutor said that Darnayís life belonged to the Republic of France under the decree that banished all emigrants on pain of death. It didnít matter that the decree was announced after he had returned to France. All that mattered was that Darnay was here in France and this is what the decree said. He had been captured in France and therefore had to have his head cut off.              

 ìCut off his head!î yelled the crowd. ìHe is an enemy of the Republic!î             

 The president rang his bell to silence the crowd and asked the prisoner if it was true that he had lived in England for many years.             

 Darnay said it was true.             

 The president asked if that made him an emigrant, and if not, what then did he call himself.             

 Darnay said he was not an emigrant, he hoped, as the law defines it.             

 The president asked why not.              

 He said because he had given up his title by choice. He didnít want it, or the position as a marquis. He left France to make his own living in England rather than live off the work of the overworked people of France.             

 The president asked him what proof he had of this.             

 Darnay handed them the names of two witnesses: Theophile Gabelle and Alexandre Manette.              

 The president reminded him that he had married in England.             

 Darnay said it was true, but he hadnít married an English woman.             

 The president asked if the woman was French.             

 He said yes, that she was French by birth.             

 The president asked her name and who her family was.             

 Darnay answered that her name is Lucie Manette. She is the only daughter of Dr. Manette, the good doctor who is sitting here.             

 The crowd was pleased by this answer, and they cheered Dr. Manette, who was well known as a good doctor. The crowd was so fickle that several ferocious individuals, who had been glaring at Darnay a moment before as if they wanted to drag him out into the street and kill him, were now crying for him.              

 Dr. Manette had instructed Charles Darnay to say these things, hoping they would help get him released. The doctor had also instructed him on everything Darnay needed to do next.              

 The president asked why he had returned to France when he did, and not sooner.             

 Darnay said he did not return sooner simply because he had no way of making a living in France except by the ways he had given up. In England he made a living by teaching French and French literature. He returned when he did after receiving an urgent letter from a French citizen, who told Darnay that his absence had put the citizenís life in danger. He came back to save a French citizenís life and to face the truth, whatever personal danger it placed him in. He asked if that were a crime in the eyes of the Republic.              

 The crowd yelled enthusiastically, ìNo!î The president rang his bell to quiet them. It didnít quiet them, though, for they continued to yell ìNo!î until they quieted down on their own.              

 The president asked the name of that citizen. Darnay explained that the citizen was his first witness. He also referred to the citizenís letter and explained that the letter had been taken from him at the barrier into Paris, but that he believed it was likely there in the papers that the president had in front of him.              

 The doctor had made sure that the letter was there. He had assured Darnay that it would definitely be there. Now it was taken out and read, and they called Citizen Gabelle to the stand to confirm the letter. He did so. Citizen Gabelle hinted delicately and politely that since the tribunal was so busy dealing with the many enemies of the Republic, he had been overlooked in Abbaye Prison. In fact, the tribunal had forgotten him entirely until three days ago, when he had been called in front of the court. The jury had released him when they decided that his accusation had been resolved when citizen Evremonde, also known as Darnay, had been captured.              

 Dr. Manette was questioned next. His popularity and his clear answers made a good impression on the court, but he continued on and told the court that Darnay was the first friend he made after he was freed from his long prison term and that Darnay had stayed in England. He told them that Darnay had always stayed faithful and devoted to Lucie and himself while they were in England. He told them that he was so far from being sympathetic with the aristocratic government of England that he was actually put on trial for his life by it as a foe of England and a friend of the United States. After Dr. Manette had presented these circumstances, discretely and straightforwardly, the jury and the crowd all agreed. Finally, when he appealed to Mr. Lorry, an English gentleman who was there in the courtroom, who, like himself, had witnessed that trial in England and could confirm his story about it, the jury declared that they had heard enough and that they were ready to vote if the president were ready to hear them.              

 The men on the jury voted aloud one at a time. Every time one of them announced his vote the crowd would shout and applaud. All of them voted in favor of the prisoner, and the president declared that Darnay was free.              

 Then the crowd started to act in a way that satisfied their fickleness and their desire to be generous and merciful. Or perhaps it was a way to balance their anger and violence. Itís impossible to tell what motivated this behavior. It was probably a combination of all three, but the urge to be generous and merciful. As soon as Darnay was acquitted, people started crying. So many men and women embraced Darnay that he was in danger of fainting from exhaustion. It was just as disturbing to him since he knew very well that those same people could have been rushing at him with the same intensity to tear him to pieces and spread his body over the streets.              

 He was rescued from these embraces when he was removed to make room for other prisoners who were to be put on trial. Five people were going to be tried together next. They were accused of being enemies of the Republic because they had not said or done anything to help the Revolution. The tribunal acted so quickly to make up for the fact that they didnít get to kill Darnay that these five were sentenced to death before Darnay had left. They were sentenced to die within the next twenty-four hours. The first of the five prisoners told Darnay by showing him a raised finger, which was the sign used in prison to signify death. All five of them added, ìLong live the Republic!î             

 There had been no audience in the court to drag out the proceedings for the five prisoners. When Dr. Manette came out of the gate, there was a large crowd around it. It seemed to him that everyone that he had seen in the courtroom was there, except for Monsieur and Madame Defarge. He couldnít find them anywhere. When he came out, the crowd charged at him all over again. They kept crying, embracing him, and shouting, all alone or all together until the people, who were standing on a riverbank, all seemed to be as mad as the rushing water in the river.             

 They put Darnay into a large chair, which was either taken from the courtroom or from one of the courtís rooms or hallways. They had thrown a red flag over it and had tied a pike with a red cap on top to the back of the chair. Ignoring the doctorís pleas, they carried Darnay home on their shoulders. The crowd, with their worn faces and red caps, made Darnay think more than once that he was confused and that he was actually in a cart on his way to be executed at the guillotine.              

 They carried him through the streets, embracing people along the way and pointing Darnay out to them. It was like a wild, dreamlike parade. They turned the snow red with their Republican colors, juast as they had reddened the snow with blood. They carried Darnay into the courtyard of the building where he lived. Dr. Manette had gone ahead to prepare Lucie, and when Darnay got off of the chair and stood on his own feet, Lucie fainted in his arms.              

 He held her to his chest and turned her beautiful face toward him so that he could kiss her unseen. He kissed her, crying. A few people in the crowd started to dance. Instantly, the rest of the crowd started dancing. The courtyard was filled with people dancing the Carmagnole. Then they picked up a young woman from the crowd and carried her around like she was the goddess of liberty. The crowd flowed out into the nearby streets, along the riverbank, and over the bridge, dancing the Carmagnole.              

 Darnay shook Dr. Manetteís hand as he stood there, victorious and proud in front of them. He shook Mr. Lorryís hand when Mr. Lorry came in panting after fighting his way through the Carmagnole. He kissed little Lucie, who was lifted up by Miss Pross so she could put her arms around his neck. He embraced Miss Pross, who was always excited and faithful to them. Then he took Lucie in his arms and carried her up to their rooms.              

 ìLucie! My love! I am safe.î             

 ìOh, dearest Charles, let me thank God for this on my knees the way I have been praying to Him.î             

 They all bowed their heads in prayer. When she was in Darnayís arms again, he said to her:             

 ìAnd now speak to your father, my dear. No other man in all of France could have done what he has done for me.î             

 She laid her head on her fatherís chest the way she had laid his head on her chest long ago in the attic in Saint Antoine. He was happy that he could repay her for all sheíd done. He felt paid back for all his suffering, and he was proud of his strength. ìYou mustnít be weak, darling,î he told her. ìDonít tremble like that. I have saved him.î             

 ìI have saved him,î he heard Dr. Manette say. He'd had dreams in which he had been released, but this wasn't a dream. He was really here. But still Lucie trembled, and was very afraid something else might happen.              

 The air around them was thick and dark. The people were so desperate for revenge and unpredictable that innocent people were constantly executed on vague suspicions or out of pure hatred. Lucie found it impossible to forget that people as innocent as her husband and just as loved by others were killed everyday. Her husband had been saved, but still she could not feel as relieved by his release as she should have. It was getting late in the wintry afternoon, and the carts carrying people to the guillotine were rolling through the streets. Lucie thought about those people, imagining Charles in one of those carts among those condemned to die. She clung to him closer and trembled more.             

 Her father tried to cheer her up. He showed compassion and strength, compared to Lucieís weakness, that was wonderful to see. No attic and no shoemaking now! He wasnít prisoner One Hundred and Five, North Tower, now! He had achieved what he set out to achieve. He had fulfilled his promise to save Charles, and showed they could all depend on him.             

 They lived a thrifty lifestyle, not only because it was the safest way to live and would not offend the common people, but because they were not rich. While Charles was in prison, he'd had to pay a great sum of money for his bad food and for his guard, and fore the care of the poorer prisoners. Partly for this reason, and partly because they didnít want someone spying on their daily lives, the Manettes didnít have any servants. The citizen and citizenesses who served as porters at the courtyard gate ran errands for them occasionally, and Mr. Lorry had almost entirely passed Jerry onto them now. He was on call for them every day and he slept there every night.              

 It was a law of the Republic, ìOne and Indivisible of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death,î that the names of every person living in a house be written on the door or doorpost. The sign had to be written in letters of a certain size and at a certain height from the ground. Mr. Jerry Cruncherís name, therefore, was written on the doorpost down at the bottom. As it grew later in the day and the shadows deepened, Mr. Cruncher himself arrived. He had been overseeing a painter whom Dr. Manette had hired to add ìCharles Evremonde, also known as Darnay,î to the list of names on the door.              

 Fear and distrust existed everywhere at that time, and all of the usual innocent ways of life had changed. In Dr. Manetteís household, as in many others, food and supplies for the day were bought every evening in small amounts from different small shops. Everyone did their best to avoid attracting attention. Everyone wanted to avoid talking to others or making other people envious.              

 For several months now, Miss Pross and Mr. Cruncher had been in charge of getting supplies. Miss Pross would carry the money and Jerry would carry the basket. They would go out shopping every afternoon around the time when the streetlamps were lit, and they would buy and bring home whatever they needed. Miss Pross could have known as much French as English by now if she'd wanted, having lived with a French family for a long time, but she had no desire to. Therefore, she knew no more of that French ìnonsenseî (as she liked calling it) than Jerry did. So her way of shopping was to just say the name of what she wanted without any other conversation. If it didnít happen to be the right word, she would look around for the thing she wanted, grab it, and hold onto it until she had paid for it. She always bargained the price down by holding up one finger less than the number the shopkeeper held up.              

 ìNow, Mr. Cruncher,î said Miss Pross, her eyes red from crying tears of joy, ìI am ready if you are.î             

 Jerry told Miss Pross in his hoarse voice that he was ready. He had worn all of the rust off of his fingers a long time ago, but he still had spiked hair.             

 ìWe need all sorts of things,î said Miss Pross. ìAnd we will have a hard time getting them. We need wine along with everything else. These patriots in their red caps will be toasting and celebrating wherever we buy it.î             

 ìIt will all be the same to you, miss, if they toast to your health or to the Old Oneís,î answered Jerry.              

 ìWhoís he?î asked Miss Pross.             

 ìMr. Cruncher, with some hesitancy, explained that he meant the devil.             

 ìHa!î said Miss Pross. ìYou donít need an interpreter to explain what these people mean. It's always darkness, murder, and mischief.î             

 ìQuiet! Please, please be careful what you say!î cried Lucie.              

 ìYes, yes, yes, Iíll be cautious,î said Miss Pross. ìBut I can say privately that I hope there arenít peasants smelling of onions and tobacco embracing each other everywhere in the streets. Now, Lucie, donít move from that fire until I come back! Take care of the dear husband who has returned to you, and keep your pretty head on his shoulder, like it is now, until I get back. May I ask a question, Dr. Manette, before I go?î             

 ìI think you can take that liberty,î the doctor answered, smiling.              

 ìFor goodness sake, donít talk about liberty. We have quite enough of that,î said Miss Pross.             

 ìQuiet! Again?î Lucie protested.             

 ìWell, my sweet,î said Miss Pross, nodding her head vigorously. ìTo make a long story short, I am British and a subject of His Most Gracious Majesty King George the Third.î Miss Pross curtseyed when she said the name. ìI say   'Confound their politics, Frustrate their knavish tricks, On him our hopes we fix, God save the King!'î lines from the song ìGod Save the King,î the national anthem of the United Kingdom  'Confound their politics, Frustrate their knavish tricks, On him our hopes we fix, God save the King!'î .             

 Mr. Cruncher, being excessively patriotic, repeated the words in his hoarse voice as if he were at church.             

 ìI am glad that you take so much pride in being an Englishman, although I wish you had never caught that cold that makes your voice so hoarse,î said Miss Pross approvingly. ìBut the question is, Dr. Manette, is there any hope yet of us getting out of Paris?î Miss Pross had a way of talking about serious matters as if they werenít serious at all. She would mention them casually, as if they just happened to come up in conversation.              

 ìNot yet, Iím afraid. It would still be dangerous for Charles.î             

 ìHey-ho-hum!î said Miss Pross, cheerfully suppressing a sigh as she looked at Lucieís blond hair in the light of the fire. ìThen we must be patient and wait. Thatís all we can do. We must hold our heads up and fight, as my brother, Solomon, used to say. Letís go now, Mr. Cruncher! Stay here and donít move, Lucie!î             

 They went out, leaving Lucie, Charles, the doctor, and little Lucie by a bright fire. Mr. Lorry was expected to return soon from Tellsonís Bank. Miss Pross had lit a lamp but had put it aside in a corner so that they could enjoy the light of the fire. Little Lucie sat by the doctor with her hands through his arm. The doctor, speaking in a tone just above a whisper, began to tell her a story about a great and powerful fairy. The fairy had opened a prison wall and rescued a prisoner who had once done the fairy a favor. Everything was calm and quiet, and Lucie was calmer than she had been before.              

 ìWhatís that?î she yelled out suddenly.             

 ìMy dear!î said the doctor, stopping his story and taking her hand. ìGet a hold of yourself. Youíre so anxious! The smallest thing, even nothing, startles you! You, your fatherís daughter!î             

 ìFather, I thought I heard strangers coming up the stairs,î said Lucie, explaining herself. Her face was pale and her voice quavered.             

 ìLucie, the staircase is as quiet as death.î As he said the last word, someone knocked on the door.             

 ìOh, Father, Father! Who can this be? Hide Charles. Save him!î             

 ìMy child,î said the doctor, getting up and putting his hand on her shoulder. ìI have saved him. How weak you are, my dear! Let me go to the door.î             

 He picked up the lamp, walked through the two outer rooms, and opened the door. He heard the sound of footsteps hurrying over the floor, and four rough men in red caps entered the room with sabers and pistols.              

 ìWeíre looking for the Citizen Evremonde, also known as Darnay,î said the first man.              

 ìWhoís looking for him?             

 ìIím looking for him. Weíre all looking for him. I know you, Evremonde. I saw you brought before the tribunal today. You are again a prisoner of the Republic.î             

 The four men surrounded Charles, who stood where he was with Lucie and their daughter clinging to him.              

 ìTell me why I am a prisoner again?î             

 ìItís enough for you to know that you are to be taken straight back to the Conciergerie. They will tell you why tomorrow when you are summoned before the tribunal again.î             

 Dr. Manette was frozen as if he had been turned to stone, and he stood holding the lamp as if he were a statue that was made to hold it. He moved after the man spoke these words and put down the lamp. He confronted the man, firmly grabbing the loose front of his red woolen shirt, and said:             

 ìYou say you know Charles Darnay. Do you know me?î             

 ìYes, I know you, Citizen Doctor.î             

 ìWe all know you, Citizen Doctor,î said the other three men.              

 The doctor looked confusedly from one man to another. After a pause he lowered his voice and said:             

 ìWill you answer Charles's questions for me then? Why is this happening?î             

 ìCitizen Doctor,î said the first, reluctantly, ìhe has been accused by the people of Saint Antoine. This citizen is from Saint Antoine.î He pointed out the second man who had come in with them.              

 The second man nodded his head and added:             

 ìHe has been accused by the people of Saint Antoine.î             

 ìAccused of what?î             

 ìDonít ask any more questions,î said the first man reluctantly. ìIf the Republic needs you to make sacrifices, then Iím sure you, as a good patriot, will be happy to make them. The Republic is more important than anything else. The people come first. Evremonde, letís go. We are in a hurry.î             

 ìOne more thing,î the doctor asked. ìWill you tell me who accused him?î             

 ìItís against the rules for me to tell you,î answered the first man. ìBut you can ask the man from Saint Antoine here.î             

 The doctor turned and looked at the man. The man shifted uneasily on his feet and rubbed his beard a little. After a while he said:             

 ìWell! It really is against the rules, but he has been accusedóand seriouslyóby Monsieur and Madame Defarge. And by one other person.î             

 ìWho was the other person?î             

 ìAre you asking me, Citizen Doctor?î             

 ìYes.î             

 ìThen you will get your answer tomorrow,î said the man from Saint Antoine with a strange look. ìFor now, I say no more!î             

 Happily unaware that Charles was being taken back to prison, Miss Pross made her way along the narrow streets and crossed the river by the Pont-Neuf bridge. She thought about the number of essential items she needed to buy. Mr. Cruncher walked beside her carrying the basket, and they both looked to the right and left into the shops they walked by. They kept an eye out for excited groups of people. If they saw any, they would leave the road to avoid them. It was a cold evening. The misty river was blurred with the reflection of blazing lights and its sound drowned out by the noise of the barges, where the smiths made guns for the Army of the Republic. Woe to the man who challenged that army! The guillotine, called the national razor, would shave his head right off.          

 Miss Pross bought a few small grocery items and some lamp oil, then thought about what wine they wanted. After looking into several wine shops, she stopped at a shop whose sign was of the Good Republican   Brutus of Antiquity the Brutus who helped to found the Roman Republic and assassinate Julius Caesar  Brutus of Antiquity . It wasnít far from the Tuileries Palace, where the look of everything interested Miss Pross. The wine shop looked quieter than any other similar place they had passed. Even though there were many patriotic red caps there, it wasn't as full as some other places. She asked Mr. Cruncher if he thought they should go inside, and he agreed, so Miss Pross and her escort entered.              

 The lights inside were dim, and people were smoking pipes and playing games with worn decks of cards and yellow dominoes. One bare-chested, bare-armed workman was covered in soot and reading a journal out loud. Other people listened to him. People wore weapons on them, or had set them down nearby where they could be easily reached. Two or three customers had slumped forward, asleep. They wore shaggy black   spencers short jackets  spencers  that were popular at the time and made them look like sleeping bears or dogs. Miss Pross and Jerry, looking out of place in this setting, approached the counter and showed what they wanted.              

 As their wine was being measured out, a man got up from a corner where he had been sitting with another man and started to leave. As he went out, he came face-to-face with Miss Pross. As soon as he faced her, Miss Pross screamed and clapped her hands.              

 Immediately everyone in the shop was standing up. They all assumed there had been an argument and somebody had been killed. They expected to see somebody fall down dead, but they only saw a man and a woman standing there, staring at each other. The man looked like a Frenchman and a patriotic Republican, and the woman was evidently English.              

 The customers were disappointed that this exchange only resulted in talk. The customers of the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity wine shop all started talking loudly. Even though they listened carefully, Miss Pross and Jerry understood so little of what they were saying that they could have been speaking Hebrew or   Chaldean a dialect of modern Aramaic  Chaldean . Miss Pross and Jerry were too surprised to try to understand any of this. For not only was Miss Pross amazed and annoyed, but Mr. Cruncher, for his own reasons, was amazed too.             

 ìWhat is the matter?î said the man who had caused Miss Pross to scream. He spoke quickly, quietly, and in English.              

 ìOh, Solomon! My dear Solomon!î cried Miss Pross, clapping her hands again. ìI havenít seen or heard from you for so long, and now I find you here!î             

 ìDonít call me Solomon. Do you want to get me killed?î asked the man in a secretive, frightened way.              

 ìBrother, brother!î cried Miss Pross, bursting into tears. ìHave I ever treated you so badly that you can ask me such a cruel question?î             

 ìThen stop talking and come outside if you want to speak to me,î said Solomon. ìPay for your wine and come outside. Whoís this man?î             

 Miss Pross shook her head dejectedly at her cold-hearted brother and said through her tears. ìThis is Mr. Cruncher.î             

 ìHe can come outside too,î said Solomon. ìDoes he think Iím a ghost?î             

 Mr. Cruncher did, in fact, look like he had seen a ghost, but he didnít say a word. Fighting back her tears, Miss Pross looked through her   reticule a small purse made of netting or lightweight fabric usually closed by a drawstring  reticule  and with great difficulty paid for the wine. As she did so, Solomon turned to the customers in the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity wine shop and offered them an explanation in French. This made them all go back to what they had been doing.          

 ìNow, what do you want?î asked Solomon, stopping at the dark street corner.          

 ìYou are my brother, and I have always loved you,î cried Miss Pross. ìHow cruel it is for you to greet me this way and be so cold to me.î             

  ìThere, confound it! There,î said Solomon, kissing her on the lips quickly. ìNow are you happy?î             

 Miss Pross shook her head and cried silently.             

 ìIf you expect me to be surprised, Iím not,î said her brother. ìI knew you were here. I know about most people who are here. If you donít want to put my life in dangeróand I half think you doógo your way as soon as possible, and let me go mine. I am busy. I am an official now.î             

 ìMy English brother, Solomon,î said Miss Pross sadly, looking up at him with tear-filled eyes, ìwho could have been one of the greatest men in England, is an official among foreigners! And such awful foreigners! Iíd almost rather have seen you dead and lying in your grave.î             

 ìI told you!î cried her brother, interrupting her. ìI knew it. You want to get me killed. Iíll be made a suspect by my own sister. Just as I am starting to do well for myself!î             

 ìHeaven forbid!î cried Miss Pross. ìI would rather never see you again, dear Solomon, though I have always loved you and always will. Say just one kind word to me and tell me there is no anger or conflict between us and I will let you go.î             

 Good Miss Pross! As if any conflict between them had been her fault. As if Mr. Lorry had not known years ago in their house on the quiet corner in Soho that her ìpreciousî brother, Solomon, had spent all of her money and abandoned her!          

 Solomon said his kind word to her, but in such a condescending and patronizing way that it seemed as if their positions in life were reversed (which is usually how it works, all over the world). Mr. Cruncher tapped him on the shoulder and interrupted unexpectedly. He asked him a question in his usual hoarse voice:             

 ìMay I ask you a question? Is you name John Solomon? Or Solomon John?             

 Solomon turned toward him with sudden distrust. Mr. Cruncher hadnít said a word until now.              

 ìCome on! Speak up,î said Mr. Cruncher (who, with his hoarse voice, couldnít speak up himself). ìJohn Solomon, or Solomon John? She calls you Solomon, and she must know since sheís your sister. And I know that your name is John. Which name goes first? And what about the name Pross too? That wasnít your name back in England.î             

 ìWhat do you mean?î             

 ìWell, I donít know exactly what I mean, because I canít remember what your name was back in England.î             

 ìNo?î             

 ìNo. But Iíll swear it was a name with two syllables in it.î             

 ìIndeed?î             

 ìYes. The other name was one syllable. I know you. You were a spy who acted as a witness at the Bailey. In the name of the   Father of Lies the devil  Father of Lies , who was your father too, what name were you called back then?î             

 ìBarsad,î said someone else, joining in.              

 ìThatís it! Iíd bet a thousand pounds on it!î cried Jerry.              

 The man who had joined in was Sydney Carton. He had his hands behind him under his riding coat, and he stood beside Mr. Cruncher as casually as he might have stood at the court of the Old Bailey.             

 ìDonít be alarmed, my dear Miss Pross. I arrived at Mr. Lorryís and surprised him last night. We agreed that I wouldnít make my presence known to anyone else until all was well or until I could be of use. I am showing myself here so I can ask your brother to have a little talk with me. I wish you had a brother with a more respectable job than Mr. Barsad. I wish for your sake that Mr. Barsad wasnít a prison sheep.î             

 ìSheepî was prison slang for ìspyî at the time. Solomon, known as the spy Barsad, was pale, and he turned even paler and asked Mr. Carton how he daredó             

 ìIíll tell you,î said Sydney. ìI saw you coming out of the prison of the Conciergerie while I was looking at the walls an hour or more ago, Mr. Barsad. You have a memorable face, and I remember faces well. I was curious to see why you were there. Since I have good reason, as you know, to associate you with the misfortunes of our poor friend Charles Darnay, I followed you. I walked into the wine shop here right after you and sat near you. By overhearing your conversation and hearing the rumors going around openly among your admirers here, I had no trouble figuring out that you are a spy. And gradually, my random decision to follow you seemed to have a purpose, Mr. Barsad.î             

 ìWhat purpose?î the spy asked.              

 ìIt would be difficult and dangerous to explain in the street. Could you do me the favor of meeting with me for a few minutes in secret, at the office of Tellsonís Bank for instance?î             

 ìAre you threatening me?î             

 ìOh! Did I say that?î             

 ìIf youíre not threatening me, why should I go there?î             

 ìReally, Mr. Barsad. I canít tell you why if you donít already know.î             

 ìDo you mean that you wonít tell me why, sir?î asked the spy uncertainly.             

 ìYou understand me very well, Mr. Barsad. I wonít tell you.î             

 Cartonís casual manner helped his quickness and skill in putting his secret plan into action and dealing with a man like Barsad. He noticed this advantage and used it.              

 ìNow I told you,î said the spy, looking accusingly at Miss Pross, ìif I get into any trouble because of this, itís your fault.î             

 ìCome, come, Mr. Barsad,î exclaimed Sydney. ìDonít be ungrateful. If it werenít for the great respect I have for your sister, I might not have presented my little proposal so nicely. I think it will benefit both of us. Will you go with me to the bank?î             

 ìIíll listen to what you have to say. Yes, Iíll go with you.î              

 ìI suggest that we escort your sister to the corner of her street first. Let me take your arm, Miss Pross. This isnít a good city for you to be out unprotected at this time. And as Mr. Cruncher knows Mr. Barsad, I will invite him to Mr. Lorryís with us. Are we ready? Come on then!î             

 Miss Pross remembered soon afterward, and to the end of her life, that as she put her hands on Sydneyís arm, looked into his face, and begged him not to hurt Solomon, there was strength of purpose in the arm and an inspired look in his eyes. These were not only a contradiction to his casual manner, but they changed him and made him look more respectable. She was too occupied then with her fears about her brother, who was so undeserving of her love, and with Sydneyís friendly assurances, to pay attention to the change she saw in him.             

 They left her on her street corner. Carton led the way to Mr. Lorryís office, which was a few minutes away. John Barsad, also known as Solomon Pross, walked beside him.              

 Mr. Lorry had just finished his dinner and was sitting in front of a cheerful little fire. Perhaps he was looking in the flames for the image of his younger self who had looked into the red coals at the Royal George Hotel in Dover many years ago. He turned his head as they entered and looked surprised when he saw the stranger, Barsad.              

 ìThis is Mr. Barsad, sir. He is Miss Prossís brother,î said Sydney.              

 ìBarsad?î repeated Mr. Lorry. ìBarsad? I know the name. And the face.î             

 ìI told you that you had a memorable face, Mr. Barsad,î said Carton, coolly. ìPlease sit down.î             

 As he took a chair, he supplied the information Mr. Lorry was looking for by saying with a frown, ìI was a witness at that trial.î Mr. Lorry remembered immediately and looked at Mr. Barsad with a clear look of hatred.             

 ìMr. Barsad was recognized by Miss Pross. He is the ëloving brotherí that you have heard about,î said Sydney. ìHe has admitted it. I also have worse news. Darnay has been arrested again.î             

 Mr. Lorry was shocked. ìWhat are you telling me!î he exclaimed. ìWhen I left him two hours ago, he was safe and free. I was about to return to him!î              

 ìArrested just the same. When was he arrested, Mr. Barsad?î             

 ìJust now, if he was already arrested.î             

 ìMr. Barsad would know best, sir,î said Sydney. ìI heard him say to a friend who was another spy over a bottle of wine at the wine shop that he has already been arrested. Barsad left the messengers at Darnayís gate and saw them let in by the porter. There is no doubt that he has been arrested again.î             

 Mr. Lorryís business-minded eye could see by looking at Barsadís face that it would just waste time to talk about it further. He was confused but could tell that something might depend on his having a clear head. He pulled himself together and listened carefully.              

 ìNow I trust that Dr. Manetteís name and influence may help him as much tomorrowóî said Sydney. ìYou said he would be brought before the tribunal again tomorrow, Mr. Barsad?î             

 ìYes, I think so.î             

 ìDr. Manetteís name will help him as much tomorrow as it did today, but that might not be true. I admit, Mr. Lorry, that I am shaken by the fact that Dr. Manette didnít have the power to stop his arrest.î             

 ìHe might not have known about it beforehand,î said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìBut thatís alarming when you remember how close everyone knows he is with Darnay.î             

 ìThatís true,î Mr. Lorry agreed, troubled. He rubbed his chin with his hand and looked at Carton.             

 ìIn short,î said Sydney, ìthis is a desperate time, when desperate games are played for desperate stakes. Winning Darnayís freedom is like a card game. Let the doctor play the winning hand. Iíll play the losing one. No manís life here is worth anything. Anyone can be carried home by the people in celebration one day and condemned to die the next. Now, in case Dr. Manette canít help him and Darnay is sentenced to death, I have decided to try to win over a friend in the Conciergerie. The friend I want to win over is Mr. Barsad.î             

 ìYouíll need good cards to win me over, sir,î said Barsad.              

 ìIíll look them over and see what I hold. Mr. Lorry, you know what a brute I am and I how much I like to drink. Please give me a little brandy.î             

 Brandy was put in front of him and he drank a whole glass. Then he drank another glass and pushed the bottle away from him thoughtfully.              

 ìMr. Barsad,î he continued, as if he really were looking over a hand of cards. ìYou are a prison spy and a representative of Republican committees. Youíve been at one time a prison guard and at one time a prisoner. Youíve always been a spy and secret informer. You are much more valuable here in France for being English because an Englishman is less likely to be suspected of corruption than a Frenchman is. You present yourself to your employers under a false name. Thatís a very good card. Mr. Barsad, now employed by the Republican French government, was formerly employed by the aristocratic English government, which was the enemy of France and freedom. Thatís an excellent card. Everyone is so suspicious in Paris these days that it would be easy to suggest that Mr. Barsad is still in the pay of the aristocratic English government and is a spy for   Pitt William Pitt the Younger, who was prime minister of England at the time  Pitt . I could accuse you of being an enemy of the Republic working right in the middle of it. I could accuse you of being an English traitor and a spy. Everyone says that there are traitors and spies around, although they are so difficult to actually find. Thatís a card that beats all. Are you following me, Mr. Barsad?î             

 ìI donít understand what you plan to do,î answered Barsad, uneasily.             

 ìI plan to play my ace and denounce you, Mr. Barsad, to the closest Section Committee. Look over your hand, Mr. Barsad, and see what cards you have to play. Take your time.î             

 Mr. Carton pulled the bottle of brandy toward him, poured himself another glass, and drank it. He saw that Barsad was worried he would get drunk and want to denounce Barsad immediately. Seeing this, Carton poured another glass and drank it.              

 ìLook over your cards carefully, Mr. Barsad. Take your time.î             

 Barsadís cards were worse than he thought. Mr. Barsad had losing cards in his hand that Sydney Carton didnít even know about. He had been thrown out of his job as a spy in England after much unsuccessful hard workónot because he was not wanted there (our English ideas about how much better the English are at secrecy and spying are the same as they are today). He had crossed the Channel and taken a job in France. First he had baited Englishmen in France into incriminating themselves and had listened in on their conversations. Then he started doing the same among the French. He knew that he had worked for the now-overthrown French government spying on the people of Saint Antoine and on Defargeís wine shop. He heard news from the police about Dr. Manetteís imprisonment, release, and his personal history. This information had helped him get to know Monsieur and Madame Defarge. He had tried to use this information on Madame Defarge, but it hadnít worked. He always remembered with fear and trembling that Madame Defarge had been knitting while she talked with him, and she had stared threateningly at him while she knitted. He had seen her since then in that section of Saint Antoine, showing the list of names she had knitted and denouncing people, who shortly after died on the guillotine. He knew, as all spies knew, that he was never safe. It was impossible to run away. He was stuck there and in danger for his life. He knew that, despite the fact that he had switched sides and now helped the Republic, one word against him might lead to his downfall. He foresaw that once he was denounced and in the dilemma Mr. Carton had just described, Madame Defarge would present her list against him, and it would surely lead to his death. All men that live secret lives are easily terrified. He had enough bad cards to make him furious as he looked them over.              

 ìYou donít seem to like your cards,î said Sydney calmly. ìWill you play your hand?î             

 ìMr. Lorry,î said Barsad, angrily, turning to him. ìYou are a kind, old gentleman. Will you please ask Mr. Carton, who is so much younger than you, whether he can reconcile it to himself to do what he says heíll do? I admit that I am a spy and that this is a shameful job, though somebody has to do it. But this gentleman isnít a spy. Why should he demean himself by accusing me?î             

 ìI will play my ace in a few minutes and accuse you, Mr. Barsad, without any doubts,î said Carton, answering himself and looking at his watch.             

 ìI would have hoped that the respect you both have for my sisteróî said Barsad, who kept trying to bring Mr. Lorry into the discussion.             

 ìThere is no better way for me to prove that I respect your sister than to finally relieve her of her brother,î said Sydney Carton.              

 ìThere isnít, sir?î asked Barsad.              

 ìI have completely made my mind up about it,î answered Carton.             

 Barsadís smooth manner was strangely at odds with his showily ragged clothes and his usual behavior. But he was so thrown off by Carton, who was a mystery to smarter, more honest men than Barsad, that he didnít know what to say. While he was trying to decide what to do next, Carton said, as if looking over his cards again:              

 ìNow that I think about it, Iím pretty sure I have another good card here that I havenít mentioned yet. That friend and fellow spy who said he spends time in the prisons. Who was he?î             

 ìHeís French. You donít know him,î said Barsad, quickly.              

 ìFrench, huh?î repeated Carton, thinking it over. He didnít seem to notice Barsad at all, although he repeated the word after him. ìWell, he might be.î             

 ìHe is, I assure you,î said Barsad. ìThough itís not important.î             

 ìThough itís not important,î repeated Carton automatically as before. ìThough itís not important. No. Itís not important. No. Yet I know his face.î             

 ìI donít think so. Iím sure you donít. You canít,î said Barsad.              

 ìI canít,î muttered Sydney Carton, thinking and twirling his glass again. Fortunately, it was a small glass. ìI canít. He spoke good French. But he spoke it like a foreigner, didnít he?î             

 ìHeís from the countryside,î said Barsad.             

 ìNo. Heís foreign!î cried Carton, hitting the table with his open hand as it became clear to him. ìCly! He was disguised, but that was Cly. That man was at the trial at the Old Bailey.î             

 ìNow, you are rushing to a conclusion,î said Barsad with a smile that made his beaklike nose curve to one side. ìThere you really give me an advantage. I will fully admit that Cly was my partner a long time ago. But Cly has been dead for several years. I saw him on his deathbed. He was buried in London at the church of Saint Pancras-in-the-Fields. He was so unpopular with the people that I couldnít follow his funeral to the graveyard because of the mob, but I helped lay him in his coffin.î             

 From where he was sitting, Mr. Lorry suddenly became aware of a strange goblin-like shadow on the wall. He looked to where it was coming from and discovered that it was caused by Mr. Cruncherís hair, which had suddenly risen and stiffened even more than usual.              

 ìLetís be reasonable,î said Barsad. ìLetís be fair. To show you how wrong you are and that your assumptions have no basis of truth, I will show you Clyís death certificate, which I happen to have carried in my pocketbook ever since.î He took it out quickly and opened it. ìThere it is. Look at it! Pick it up. Itís not a forgery.î             

 Mr. Lorry saw the shadow on the wall grow longer, and Mr. Cruncher stepped forward. His hair could not have been standing up any more if it had been arranged by   the cow with the crumpled horn in the house that Jack built the quote, which describes a cowlick, is from ìThis Is the House That Jack Built,î by Mother Goose  the cow with the crumpled horn in the house that Jack         built .              

 Barsad didnít see Mr. Cruncher standing beside him, and Mr. Cruncher tapped him on the shoulder.             

 ìSo you put Roger Cly in his coffin, master?î asked Mr. Cruncher, coldly.             

 ìI did.î             

 ìWho took him out of it?î             

 Barsad leaned back in his chair. He said, stuttering, ìWhat do you mean?î             

 ìI mean that he was never in it,î said Mr. Cruncher. ìNo! He wasnít. You can chop off my head if he was ever in it.î             

 Barsad looked around at Mr. Carton and Mr. Lorry. They both looked at Jerry in astonishment.              

 ìI tell you that you buried cobblestones and dirt in that coffin,î said Jerry. ìDonít tell me that you buried Cly. It was a scam. I and two more people know it.î             

 ìHow do you know?î             

 ìWhy do you care, by God!î growled Mr. Cruncher. ìYouíre the person I have an old grudge against, arenít you? Causing trouble for an honest businessman? Iíd choke you to death for half a guinea.î             

 Sydney Carton and Mr. Lorry were amazed by this unexpected turn. Carton asked Mr. Cruncher to calm down and explain himself.             

 ìIíll explain some other time, sir,î he answered evasively. ìNow is not the time to explain. I say that he knows full well that Cly was never in that coffin. Let him say one syllable of one word that he was, and Iíll choke him to death for half a guineaóî Mr. Cruncher made this sound like a generous offer ìóor Iíll go outside and accuse him.î             

 ìHumph! I see one thing,î said Carton. ìI hold another card, Mr. Barsad. There is a violent atmosphere, full of suspicion, here in Paris. It would be impossible for you to live through being accused of communicating with another aristocratic spy who has the same history as your own. Someone who also faked his own death and has come back to life again! You will be accused of being a foreigner who was starting plots in the prisons against the Republic. That is a good card, a card that will certainly send you to the guillotine. Will you play your hand?î             

 ìNo!î answered Barsad. ìI give up. I confess that we were so unpopular with the mob that I only got away from England at the risk of being drowned to death, and that Cly was being chased so much that he never would have gotten away if he hadnít faked his own death. Though how Mr. Cruncher knows that it was a scam I have no idea.î             

 ìDonít worry about me,î answered Mr. Cruncher angrily. ìYouíll have enough trouble dealing with these two gentleman. And look here! Once again!î Mr. Cruncher couldnít be stopped from showing off his generosity. ìIíd grab you by the throat and choke you for half a guinea.î             

 Barsad, the prison spy, turned from Mr. Cruncher to Sydney Carton and said decisively, ìLetís get to the point. I go on duty soon and canít be late. You told me you had a proposal. What is it? Now, itís no use asking too much from me. If you ask me to do anything as an official of the Republic that puts me in too much danger, it would be better for me take my chances and refuse you than to agree. In short, I will refuse you. You talk of desperation. Everyone is desperate. Remember! I might denounce you if I think itís what I should do. I can lie very well, and so can others. Now, what do you want me to do?î             

 ìNot very much. You are a prison guard at the Conciergerie?î             

 ìIíll tell you for sure that there is no way to escape,î said Barsad, firmly.             

 ìWhy are you telling me what I didnít ask? You are a guard at the Conciergerie?î             

 ìI am sometimes.î             

 ìYou can be a guard there when you want to be?î             

 ìI can go in and out when I choose.î             

 Sydney Carton filled another glass with brandy and poured it slowly on the hearth of the fireplace. He watched it as it spilled out, and after it was all gone he said, getting up:              

 ìSo far, we have spoken in front of these two because it made sense that this discussion wasnít just between the two of us. Now letís go into this dark room and have one final word alone.î              

 Sydney Carton and Barsad were in the dark room next door, speaking so quietly that no sound was heard. Mr. Lorry looked at Jerry with doubt and mistrust. The way Cruncher, the honest businessman, reacted to this look didnít make Mr. Lorry any more confident. Cruncher shifted back and forth on his feet as often as if he had fifty feet and were standing on each of them. He looked at his fingernails a little too closely, and whenever Mr. Lorry looked him in the eye, Mr. Cruncher would cough and put his hand over his mouth like a man who was hiding something.             

 ìCome here, Jerry,î said Mr. Lorry.             

 Mr. Cruncher came toward him, moving sideways and leading with one shoulder.             

 ìWhat job have you had, besides being a messenger?î             

 After thinking about it and looking intently at Mr. Lorry, Mr. Cruncher had the bright idea of answering, ìItís of an agricultural nature.î             

 ìI am concerned that you have used the respectable and great Tellsonís Bank as a cover, and that you have been doing something illegal. If you have, donít expect me to remain friendly with you when you get back to England. If you have, donít expect me to keep your secret. You cannot take advantage of Tellsonís Bank.î              

 ìIíve had the honor of working for you until Iíve turned gray, so I hope that a gentleman like you would think twice about harming me. Even if what you say is trueóI donít say that it is trueóbut if it was. And it should be taken into account that if it were true, there would be two sides to the story. There might be doctors right now earning   guineas an English coin with a high value  guineas  when an honest businessman like me doesnít  even earn   farthings an English coin worth one-quarter of a penny  farthings . Farthings! No, not even half-farthings. Half-farthings! No, not even quarter-farthings. These doctors come into Tellsonís to do their banking and start giving me knowing looks on the sly as they go out to their private carriages. Well, they are imposing on Tellsonís, too. You canít blame the goose and not the gander. And then thereís Mrs. Cruncher to deal with, or at least I had to deal with her back in England. Sheís always flinging herself down and praying against my success so much that it ruins me. Ruins me! Whereas those medical doctorsí wives donít pray against them. Those doctors would catch them at it. Or if they pray, they pray for more patients, and how can you have one without the other? Then, what with undertakers to bribe, and parish clerks, and sextons, and greedy private guards, a man wouldnít even earn that much. And what little a man did earn would never be enough to allow him to prosper, Mr. Lorry. Things would never be good for him. The whole time heíd want to give up that line of work, if he could find a way out of it after having already been in itóif what you say is true.î              

 ìUgh!î cried Mr. Lorry, relenting, nevertheless. ìI am shocked at the sight of you.î             

 ìNow, what I would like to offer you, sir,î continued Mr. Cruncher, ìeven if it was true, which I donít say it isóî             

 ìDonít avoid the question,î said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìNo, I will not, sir,î answered Mr. Cruncher as if nothing were further from his mind. ìI donít say that it is true. Hereís my offer, sir. My boy is sitting on that stool there at Temple Bar. I brought him up and his has grown into a man. If you want, he will run errands and messages for you and do general small jobs for you until youíre dead. If it was true, although I still donít say it isófor I wonít avoid the subject, sirólet the boy take my place and work for you. Let him take care of his mother. Donít turn me in, sir, let me go into honest grave digging full-time and make up for the graves I dug upóif it was trueóby digging them legally and keeping them safe. That, Mr. Lorry, is what I respectfully offer you, sir,î said Mr. Cruncher, wiping his forehead with his arm to show that he was finishing his speech. ìThere are so many people having their heads cut off that it is bringing down the wages a man can earn as a porter. A man doesnít see all of these dreadful things going on around him without having serious thoughts about things, and these would be my thoughts. I beg you to remember that I said what I said about Mr. Barsad to help Mr. Darnay. I could have kept quiet.î              

 ìAt least that is true,î said Mr. Lorry. ìDonít say any more for now. I might still be your friend, if you deserve it, and if you repent in action, not just in words. I donít want to hear any more words.î             

 Mr. Cruncher was rubbing his forehead with his knuckle as Sydney Carton and Barsad came back from the dark room. ìAdieu, Mr. Barsad,î said Carton. ìNow that we have made our arrangement, you donít have to be afraid of me.î             

 He sat down in a chair by the fire near Mr. Lorry. When they were alone, Mr. Lorry asked him what he had done.              

 ìNot much. If things should go badly with Darnay in prison, I have made sure that we will be able to visit him once.î             

 Mr. Lorry looked disappointed.              

 ìItís all I could do,î said Carton. ìIf I demanded too much of him, it would put his life in danger. As he said himself, the same thing would happen to him if he were denounced. It was the obvious weakness of my position. There is nothing to be done about it.î             

 ìBut if things go badly in front of the tribunal, going to visit him wonít save him,î said Mr. Lorry.             

 ìI never said that it would.î             

 Mr. Lorry eventually looked back at the fire. The sympathy he had for Lucie and his disappointment over Darnayís second arrest gradually weakened him. He was an old man now. Lately he had been overwhelmed by anxiety, and he started to cry.              

 ìYou are a good man and a true friend,î said Carton. His voice sounded different. ìForgive me if I notice that you are moved by this. If you were my father, I couldnít watch you weep and sit by without caring. And I could not respect your sorrow more if you were my own father. Fortunately for you, you are not my father.î             

 Though he said the last words with a slip into his usual casual manner, there was sincerity in his tone and in his touch that Mr. Lorry didnít expect. He had never seen Cartonís gentle side. Mr. Lorry gave Carton his hand, and Carton gently squeezed it.             

 ìTo return to the subject of poor Darnay,î said Carton. ìDonít tell Lucie about this conversation or the arrangement we have made. She wonít be able to go see him. She might think that, in the worst case, it was arranged to bring him a way of killing himself before he was sent to the guillotine.î             

 Mr. Lorry hadnít thought of that, and he looked quickly at Carton to see if thatís what he was thinking. It seemed that it was, and Carton looked back at him as if they understood each other.             

 ìShe might think a thousand different things,î said Carton. ìAny of them would only make her worry more. Donít mention me to her. As I told you when I first arrived, itís better that I donít see her. I can reach out and do what little for her that I can without her seeing me. You are going to visit her, I hope? She must be very unhappy tonight.î             

 ìI am going there right now.î             

 ìIím glad. Sheís attached to you and relies on you. How does she look?î             

 ìAnxious and unhappy, but very beautiful.î             

 ìAh!î             

 Carton made a long, grieving sound, like a sighóalmost like a sob. It made Mr. Lorry look at Cartonís face, which was turned to the fire. A light, or a shadow (Mr. Lorry couldnít have said which), passed over his face quickly. He used his foot to put back a small flaming log that had rolled forward in the fire. He wore a white riding coat and boots, which were in style then, an their light surfaces in the light of the fire made him look very pale. His long, uncut brown hair hung loosely around him. He didnít seem to notice the fire, and Mr. Lorry warned him that his boot was still on the hot embers of the flaming log after the log had broken under the weight of his foot.              

 ìI forgot it,î he said.             

 Mr. Lorry looked at his face again. He noticed a wasted look that tarnished his naturally handsome face and was reminded of the expression on the faces of prisoners he had seen lately.              

 ìAnd your work here is coming to an end, sir?î said Carton, turning toward him.              

 ìYes. As I was telling you last night when Lucie came in so unexpectedly, I have finally done all I can do here. I had hoped to leave the Manettes perfectly safe and then to leave Paris. I have my pass, which allows me to leave the city. I was ready to go.î             

 They were both silent.              

 ìYou have had a long life to look back on, sir?î said Carton thoughtfully.             

 ìI am seventy-eight years old.î             

 ìYou have worked hard all your life. You have always been busy. You are trusted, respected, and looked up to?î             

 ìI have been a businessman ever since I became a man. I was even a businessman when I was still a boy.î             

 ìLook at what you are doing at the age of seventy-eight. How many people will miss you when you die!î             

 ìI am a lonely, old bachelor,î answered Mr. Lorry, shaking his head. ìNobody will weep for me when I die.î              

 ìHow can you say that? Wouldnít Lucie weep for you? Wouldnít her daughter?î             

 ìYes, yes. Thank God. I didnít mean exactly what I said.î             

 ìIt is something to thank God for, isnít it?î             

 ìOf course.î             

 ìIf you could say truthfully tonight, ëNo one has any love, attachment, gratitude, or respect for me. No one thinks of me tenderly. I have done nothing good or helpful to be remembered by!í the years you have lived would be a curse instead of a blessing, wouldnít they?î             

 ìThatís true, Mr. Carton. I think they would be.î             

 Sydney looked at the fire again. After sitting in silence for a few moments, he said:             

 ìI want to ask you. Does your childhood seem like it was a long time ago? Do the days when you sat at your motherís knee seem like a long time ago?î             

 Mr. Lorry could see that Carton had softened. He answered:             

 ìTwenty years ago, yes. But at this time of my life, no, it doesnít. As I get closer and closer to death, itís as if I was traveling in a circle and moving nearer and nearer to the beginning. It seems to be one of the kind ways we prepare ourselves for death. I now remember fondly many memories that I had forgotten for a long time. Memories of my pretty mother and the times when I was young. Times when the world didnít seem so harsh to me and I didnít know my own faults.î             

 ìI understand that feeling!î exclaimed Carton, blushing. ìAnd you are the better for it?î             

 ìI hope so.î             

 Carton ended the conversation then by getting up to help Mr. Lorry put his coat on. ìBut youóyou are young,î said Mr. Lorry, returning to the subject.             

 ìYes,î said Carton. ìI am not old, but my youthful behavior was not a good way to age. Enough about me.î             

 ìAnd enough about me,î said Mr. Lorry. ìAre you going out?î             

 ìIíll walk with you to Lucieís gate. You know my wandering and restless habits. If I roam the streets for a long time, donít worry. I will come back in the morning. You are going to the court tomorrow?î             

 ìYes, unfortunately.î             

 ìIíll be there, but only as a member of the crowd. Barsad will find a place for me. Take my arm, sir.î             

 Mr. Lorry took his arm, and they went downstairs and out into the streets. In a few minutes they were at Mr. Lorryís destination. Carton left him there, but he waited a little ways off. When the gate was shut again he went back and touched it. He had heard that Lucie went to stand outside the prison every day. ìShe came out here,î he said, looking around him. ìShe turned this way. She must have walked on these cobblestones often. Let me follow her steps.î             

 It was ten oíclock at night when he arrived in front of La Force Prison, where she had stood hundreds of times. A little wood sawyer had closed up his shop and was smoking his pipe in the shop door.              

 ìGood evening, citizen,î said Sydney Carton. He paused as he went by, for the man was looking at him curiously.              

 ìGood evening, citizen.î             

 ìHowís the Republic doing?î             

 ìYou mean the guillotine. Not bad. Sixty-three people killed today. We will make it to a hundred soon. The executioner, Samson, and his men complain sometimes of being exhausted. Ha, ha, ha! Heís funny, that Samson. Such a barber wielding our National Razor!î              

 ìDo you go to see executions at the guillotine very often?î             

 ìDo I see people getting ëa shaveí? Always. Every day. Heís quite the barber. Youíve seen him at work?î             

 ìNever.î             

 ìGo and see him when he has a good group of prisoners. Think about this, citizen. He killed sixty-three people today, in less time than it took me to smoke two pipes. Less than two pipes! I swear!î             

 The grinning little man held out the pipe he was smoking to show how he had timed the executioner. Carton wanted to beat the man to death so badly that he turned away from him.             

 ìBut you are not English, although you dress like an Englishman?î asked the wood sawyer.î             

 ìYes,î said Carton. He paused again and answered over his shoulder.              

 ìYou speak like a Frenchman.î             

 ìI studied a long time here.î             

 ìAh-ha, youíre like a perfect Frenchman! Good night, Englishman.î             

 ìGood night, citizen.î             

 ìBut go and see the executioner,î the little man continued, yelling after him. ìAnd take a pipe with you!î             

 Sydney had not gone far out of sight when he stopped in the middle of the street under a shining streetlamp. He wrote something down in pencil on a scrap of paper, then walked through several dark and dirty streets with the confidence of a man who remembered the way well. The streets were dirtier than usual, as even the best roads werenít cleaned during those violent times. He stopped at a chemistís shop, which was just closing up. The shop was located on a main road that went up a steep hill. It was small, dark, and crooked, and a small, dark, and crooked man owned it.             

 He said good evening to the shopkeeper, too, as he went up to the counter. He put the scrap of paper in front of him. ìWhew!î the chemist whistled softly as he read it. ìHi, hi, hi!î             

 Sydney Carton ignored him. The chemist said:             

 ìThis is for you, citizen?î             

 ìItís for me.î             

 ìYouíll make sure to keep them separate, citizen? You know what will happen if you mix them.î             

 ìI know perfectly well.î             

 The chemist made up some small packets and gave them to Mr. Carton, who put them in the breast pocket of his inner coat one by one. He counted out the money for them, paid the shopkeeper, and left the shop quickly. ìThere is nothing more I can do until tomorrow,î he said, looking up at the moon. ìI canít sleep.î             

 He said this aloud under the clouds that were moving quickly across the sky. He didnít say these words casually. He said them defiantly. He had the determination of a tired man who had wandered and struggled and gotten lost, but who had finally found the right path and saw the end in sight.              

 Long ago, when Carton had been famous among his early competitors as a young man with a great future ahead of him, his father had died. His mother had died years earlier. Now he thought of the solemn words that he had read at his fatherís grave as he walked down the dark streets covered with shadows. The moon and clouds sailed high above him. He thought, ìI am the resurrection and the life, says the Lord. Whoever believes in me that is dead will live again. Whoever lives and believes in me will never die.î             

 Mr. Carton was alone at night in Paris, which was dominated by the guillotine. He was feeling sympathy for the sixty-three people who had been executed that day and sympathy for the people now in prison who would be executed tomorrow. There were many reasons to think about these words, and he repeated them and walked on.              

 He looked at the lit windows where people were going to sleep and could forget the horrible things happening around them for a few calm hours. He looked at the towers of the churches where no one was praying, for the people were even disgusted by religion after years of corruption by thieves, vagrants, and people acting as priests. He looked at the graveyards far away reserved for ìeternal sleep,î as it was written on the graveyard gates. He looked at the surrounding jails and the streets along which the sixty or so condemned people were carried in carts to their deaths. This had become so common that no one even made up ghost stories about the people killed at the guillotine. He thought about the lives and deaths of everyone in Paris as they all settled down to sleep. Then Sydney Carton crossed the Seine River again and headed for better-lit streets.          

 There werenít many coaches in the streets, as people riding in coaches were often suspected. The higher classes hid among the peasants by wearing red caps and heavy shoes and walking with everyone else, but the theaters were full. As he walked past, people poured out of them cheerfully and went home, talking together. At one of the theater doors there was a little girl with her mother. They were looking for a way to cross the street through the mud. Sydney carried the child across the street. Before she had let go of his neck, he asked her for a kiss.             

 ìI am the resurrection and the life, says the Lord. Whoever believes in me, even though he is dead, he shall live. And whoever lives and believes in me shall never die.î             

  Now that the streets were quiet and the night continued on, the words echoed around him. He was completely calm and steady. Sometimes he repeated them out loud to himself as he walked, but he heard them continuously in his head.          

 Then the night was over. He stood on a bridge listening to the water as it splashed against the river walls of the island of Paris. A beautiful cluster of houses and a cathedral shone in the moonlight. The day came on coldly, looking like a dead personís face in the sky. Then the night, with the moon and the stars, turned pale and faded away, and for a little while it seemed like death had taken over the whole world.              

 Then the glorious sun rose and it was daylight. It warmed Sydneyís heart with its long, bright rays. As he shaded his eyes with his hand and looked at the sunshine, it looked like there was a bridge of light between him and the sun, and the river sparkled below it.              

 The tide was strong and fast and always there, like a friend in the stillness of the morning. He walked by the stream, far away from the houses, and fell asleep on the riverbank in the light and warmth of the sun. Then he woke up and stood there a little longer. He watched a whirlpool in the stream that turned and turned without purpose until the stream absorbed it and carried it out to sea. ìLike me,î thought Sydney.             

 A trading boat glided into view. Its sail was the color of a dead leaf, and it floated by him and died away. As the track of water that it made disappeared, the prayer he had been repeating to himself asking mercy for all his faults and mistakes ended with the words, ìI am the resurrection and the life.î             

 Mr. Lorry was already out when he got back. It was easy to guess where he had gone. Sydney Carton drank nothing but a little coffee and ate some bread. After he washed up and changed clothes to refresh himself, he went to Darnayís trial.             

 The court was full of noise and activity, when the court officials, whom many moved away from in fear, pushed him into a corner of the crowd. Mr. Lorry was there, and so was Dr. Manette. Lucie was there, sitting next to her father.          

 Lucie turned to look at Darnay when he was brought in. She was supportive, encouraging, and full of love and tenderness, and she was being so brave for his sake that it made him blush. It brightened his glance and made his heart beat fast. If anyone had noticed how her appearance changed Sydney Carton, they would have noticed that the exact same look was now on his face, too.              

 There was hardly any order of procedure at the unjust tribunal that assured an accused person of receiving a fair hearing. The Revolution had eliminated all of the laws, formalities, and ceremonies of the government, the terrible abuse of which caused the Revolution in the first place.              

 Everyone looked at the jury. The same patriots and republicans were on the jury that had been there the day before and would still be there the day after. There was one man among them who seemed important and eager. He had a greedy look on his face, and his fingers were constantly moving around his lips. The crowd was very happy to see him, and he looked thirsty for blood as if he were a cannibal. He was Jacques Three from Saint Antoine. The whole jury was as hungry as a jury of dogs brought together to put a deer on trial.              

 Everyone turned to look at the five judges and the public prosecutor. No one among them looked sympathetic. They all looked vicious and murderous. Then everyone looked at the other people in the crowd, and the all nodded their heads approvingly to each other before they leaned forward attentively.              

 The prosecutor stated Darnayís case. His name was Charles Evremonde, also known as Darnay. He was released yesterday. He was reaccused and taken in custody again yesterday. The formal accusation was delivered to him last night. He is suspected and denounced as an enemy of the Republic. He is an aristocrat. He comes from a family of tyrants who have been banned for using their power to oppress the peasants. Charles Evremonde, also known as Darnay, has been banned by the law and should definitely be sentenced to death.              

 In this way, in as few words or fewer, the public prosecutor pronounced his sentence.              

 The president asked if Darnay had been denounced openly or secretly.             

 ìThe prosecutor answered, ìOpenly, president.î             

 ìBy whom?î asked the president.             

 ìBy three people. Ernest Defarge, a wine seller from Saint Antoine,î answered the prosecutor.             

 ìGood.î             

 ìTherese Defarge, his wife.î             

 ìGood.î             

 ìDr. Alexandre Manette.î             

 The crowd in the courtroom roared. Dr. Manette could be seen in the middle of the crowd, pale and trembling. He had stood up where he had been sitting.          

 ìPresident, I protest that this is a forgery and a fraud. You know that Darnay is my daughterís husband. My daughter, and those she loves, are much more important to me than my own life. Who and where is the liar who says that I denounced my daughterís husband!î             

 ìCalm down, Citizen Manette. To speak out of turn against the authority of the tribunal is breaking the law. Regarding what is more important to you than your life, nothing can be as important to a good citizen as the Republic.î             

 People cheered loudly at this, and the president rang his bell and continued.             

 ìIf the Republic demanded that you give up even your own child, you would have to sacrifice her. Listen to what will follow. In the meantime, be quiet!î             

 The crowd shouted again, and Dr. Manette sat down. He looked around him. His lips were trembling, and Lucie pulled closer to him. Jacques Three in the jury rubbed his hands together and brought his hand to his mouth as usual.              

 Defarge came forward. When the court was quiet enough for him to be heard, he quickly told the story of Manetteís imprisonment and how Defarge had been a servant of Dr. Manette when he was just a boy. He told them about Manetteís release, and about the state he was in when he was released and brought to the attic in Saint Antoine. This short examination came next, as the court was quick with its work:              

 ìYou did good work at the taking of the Bastille, Citizen Defarge?î             

 ìI believe so.î             

 At this, an excited woman yelled from the crowd, ìYou were one of the best patriots there. Why not say so? You were firing a cannon that day. You were among the first to enter the accursed Bastille when it fell. Patriots, Iím telling the truth!î             

 It was The Vengeance who was yelling. The crowd cheered warmly along with her, and the president rang his bell. But The Vengeance, feeling encouraged, shrieked, ìI defy that bell!î and the crowd cheered her again.              

 ìTell the tribunal what you did at the Bastille that day, Citizen Defarge.î             

 Defarge looked down at his wife. She stood at the bottom of the steps where he was standing, looking up at him steadily. ìI knew that this prisoner, Manette, had been held in the cell known as One Hundred and Five, North Tower. He told me so himself. He only knew himself by the name One Hundred and Five, North Tower, when he was in my care and still making shoes. While I was firing my cannon that day, I decided that when the fortress fell I would examine that cell. The Bastille fell and I went up to the cell with another citizen who is on the jury, directed by the jailer. I examined it very closely. There was a hole in the chimney where a stone had been pulled out and replaced. In it I found a paper with writing on it. This is that piece of paper. I have made it my business to examine other examples of Dr. Manetteís writing. This is Dr. Manetteís handwriting. I give this paper, written by Dr. Manette, to the president.          

 ìLet it be read.î             

 Everything was dead silent and still. Darnay looked lovingly at his wife. His wife would only look away from him to look at her father with concern. Dr. Manette kept looking at the reader. Madame Defarge never looked away from Darnay, and Defarge never looked away from his wife. Everyone else looked at the doctor intently, but the doctor didnít notice any of them. The paper was read, as follows.              

 ìI, Alexandre Manette, an unfortunate doctor, born in Beauvais and later a resident of Paris, am writing this paper in my cell in the Bastille in December 1767. I write it a few moments at a time, under very difficult conditions. I plan to hide it in the wall of the chimney, where I have slowly and with much difficulty made a hiding place for it. Someone might find it there when my sorrows and I have both died away.              

 ìI write these words with a rusty iron point and with bits of soot and charcoal from the chimney, mixed with my blood. This is December of the tenth year I have been in prison. I have no hope left. I know from warning signs I have seen in myself that I will soon lose my sense of reason, but I swear that at the moment I am in my right mind, that my memory is sharp. As these will be my last written words I swear that what I write is the truth, whether my words are ever read by men on earth or by God on the day of Judgment.             

 ìOne cloudy moonlit night in the third week of December 1757 (I think it was December 22nd), I was walking on a secluded part of the quay by the Seine River to get some fresh air. I was an hour away from my home on the Street of the School of Medicine when a carriage came up behind me moving very quickly. As I stood aside to let the carriage go by, fearing that it might run me over otherwise, someone put his head out of the window and a voice called to the driver to stop.              

 ìThe carriage stopped as soon as the driver could slow down the horses, and the same voice called to me by name. I answered. The carriage was so far ahead of me by then that the two gentlemen had time to open the door and get out before I came up to it.              

 ìI saw that they were both wrapped up in cloaks and appeared to hide themselves. As they stood side by side near the carriage door, I could also see that they both looked to be about my age, or a bit younger. They looked very much alike in size, behavior, and voice and, as far as I could see, in face too.          

 ìëYou are Dr. Manette?í said one.              

 ìI am.î             

 ìëDr. Manette from Beauvais,í said the other. ëThe young doctor who was an expert surgeon and who has built a good reputation for himself here in Paris in the last year or two?î             

 ìëGentlemen,í I answered, ëI am the man that you speak of so kindly.í             

 ìëWe have been to your house,í said the first man. ëWe didnít find you there and were told that you were probably walking in this direction. We followed you, hoping to catch up. Will you please get in our carriage?í             

 ìThey were both intimidating. As they said this, they both moved so that I was between them and the carriage door. They were armed, and I was not.             

 ìëExcuse me, gentlemen,í I said, ëbut I usually ask who is seeking my help and what the patientís illness is.í             

 ìThe man who had spoken second answered this. ëDoctor, the clients who need your help are important people. We are confident in your skills and are sure you can decide for yourself what the illness is better than we can describe it. Enough. Will you please get in the carriage?í             

 ìI could do nothing but obey, and I got into the carriage in silence. They both got in after me, the last one in jumped in after putting up the steps. The carriage turned around and drove on as fast as before.             

 ìI repeat the conversation that followed exactly as it occurred. I have no doubt that it is, word for word, the same. I describe everything exactly as it happened and force my mind to stay focused on the task. The broken marks that follow indicate where I stopped writing for the moment and returned my paper to its hiding place.             

 ***             

 ìThe carriage drove beyond the city streets, passed the north barrier, and came out onto a country road. At two-thirds of a league away from the barrier, the carriage left the main road and soon stopped at a secluded house. I didnít estimate the distance then but did so afterward when I returned. The three of us got out and walked along a damp, soft path in a garden, where a neglected fountain had overflowed, to the door of the house. When they rang the bell, the door did not open right away. When a servant finally opened it, one of the two men with me slapped the servant across the face with his riding glove.              

 ìThere was nothing unusual about this, as I had seen common people hit more often than dogs. But the second of the two men, who was also angry, hit the man in the face with his arm. Their look and behavior was so exactly alike that this was when I first noticed they were twin brothers.              

 ìThe outer gate had been locked, and one of the brothers opened it to let us in and then locked it again. From the time we had gotten out of the carriage at the outer gate I heard cries coming from a room upstairs. I was taken straight to this room, and the cries grew louder as we climbed the stairs. I found a patient with a high fever of the brain lying on a bed.              

 ìThe patient was a beautiful young woman, not much more than twenty years old. Her hair was torn and ragged, and her arms were tied to her sides with sashes and handkerchiefs. I noticed that these ties were all pieces of a gentlemanís wardrobe. On one of them, which was a fringed ceremonial scarf, I saw the coat of arms of a noble family and the letter E. 

 ìI saw this in the first minute of examining the patient. In her twisting and turning she had turned over on her face on the edge of the bed. She had taken the end of the scarf in her mouth and was in danger of suffocating. The first thing I did was to reach out my hand to help her breathe, and in moving aside the scarf, I saw the embroidered coat of arms.              

 ìI turned her over gently and placed my hands on her chest to calm her and keep her down. I looked into her face. Her eyes were dilated and wild, and she was screaming constantly. She repeated the words, ëMy husband, my father, and my brother!í Then she would count to twelve and say ëHush!í She would pause and listen for just a moment, then she would would repeat the cry, ëMy husband, my father, and my brother!í and count up to twelve and say ëHush!í This was always exactly the same. Except for her regular pauses, she never stopped saying these words.             

 ìëHow long has she been doing this?í I asked.             

 ìTo distinguish between the two brothers, I will call them the older and the younger. By the older, I mean the one that seemed to be in charge. It was the older brother who replied, ëSince about this time last night.í             

 ìëShe has a husband, a father, and a brother?í             

 ìëShe has a brother.í             

 ìëYou are not her brother?í             

 ìHe answered with great contempt, ëNo.í             

 ìëShe has some recent connection with the number twelve?í             

 ìThe younger brother impatiently joined in, ëDo you mean with twelve oíclock?í             

 ìëSee, gentlemen,í I said, keeping my hands on her chest, ëI am useless as you have brought me! If I had known what I was coming to see, I could have brought what I needed. As it is, we must lose more time. There is nowhere to find medicine out here in this lonely place.í             

 ìThe older brother looked at the younger brother. He said haughtily, ëThere is a case full of medicine here.í He took the case out of a closet and put it on the table.î             

  * * *              

 ìI opened some of the bottles, smelled them, and put the stoppers to my lips. I wouldnít have used any of them unless I wanted to narcotics that were poisons in themselves.              

 ìëDo you think they wonít work?í asked the younger brother.              

 ìYou see, monsieur, Iím going to use them,í I replied, and said no more.             

 ìAfter trying very hard several times, I made the patient swallow the dose I wanted her to take. I planned to do the same thing again after a while. I needed to watch how it affected her, so I sat down by the side of the bed. There was a nervous, fearful peasant woman there who was the wife of the man downstairs. She had retreated into a corner. The house was damp and falling apart, and it was furnished indifferently, suggesting it had only recently been occupied and only used temporarily. Some thick tapestries had been nailed up over the windows to deaden the sounds of the womanís screams. She continued to scream constantly and to cry out, ìMy husband, my father, and my brother!î Then she would count up to twelve and say ëHush!í Her fit was so violent that I didnít untie the bandages restraining her arms. But I looked at them to make sure they werenít hurting her. The only encouraging thing about her case was that when I placed my hands on her chest it seemed to calm her for a few minutes. It didnít stop the screams, which happened as regularly as the swinging of a pendulum.              

 ìSince I assumed that my hand was calming her, I sat by her bedside for half an hour while the two brothers looked on. Then the older brother said:             

 ìëThere is another patient.í             

 ìI was surprised. I asked, ëIs it a serious case?í             

 ìëYouíd better see for yourself,í he answered carelessly, and picked up a lantern.î             

 ***             

 ìThe other patient was lying in a back room across a second staircase. It was a kind of loft over a stable. There was a low plastered ceiling over part of it, and the rest of it was open to the edge of the tiled roof. There were beams across it. Hay and straw were stored in that part of it, as well as small pieces of firewood and piles of apples stored in sand. I had to walk through that part to get to the other side of the room. My memory is sharp, and I challenge it with these details. Here in my cell in the Bastille I see them all as clearly as I saw them that night.              

 ìA handsome peasant boy was lying on his back on some hay on the ground, with a cushion under his head. The boy wasnít older than seventeen. His teeth were clenched, his right hand was grabbing his chest, and his eyes were staring straight up. I couldnít see where his wound was as I kneeled over him on one knee, but I could see he was dying of a stab wound.              

 ìëI am a doctor, my poor fellow,í I said. ëLet me examine it.í             

 ìëI donít want you to examine it,í he answered. ëLeave it alone.í             

 ìThe wound was under his hand. I calmed him and he let me move his hand away. The wound had come from the thrust of a sword, done twenty to twenty-four hours earlier. But no one could have saved him even it had been looked at right away. He was dying fast. As I looked at the older brother I saw him looking down at this handsome dying boy as if he were a wounded bird, or a rabbit, not at all like a fellow human.             

 ìëHow did this happen, monsieur?í I asked one of the brothers.             

 ìëHeís a crazy young peasant! A serf! He forced my brother to draw his sword on him, and he has been wounded by my brotherís swordólike a gentleman.í             

 ìThere was no hint of pity, sorrow, or humanity in his answer. He seemed to admit that it was inconvenient to have a peasant dying there and that it would have been better if he had died unnoticed, as peasants usually did. He was unable to feel any compassion for the dying boy.              

 ìThe boy had looked at the brother slowly as he spoke. Now he slowly looked at me.             

 ìëDoctor, these nobles are very proud. But sometimes we peasants are proud, too. They steal from us, anger us, beat us, and kill us. But sometimes we still have a little pride left. Sheóhave you seen her, doctor?í             

 ìThe screams and cries could be heard there, although they were quieter and in the distance. The boy referred to them as if she were lying there near us.             

 ìI said, ëI have seen her.í             

 ìëShe is my sister, Doctor. They have taken their right as nobles and have had their way with our sisters and peasant women for many years. But we have good girls among us. I know it and have heard my father say so. My sister was a good girl. She was engaged to a good young man too, a serf that belonged to this noble. We were all serfs that belonged to himóthat man standing there. The other man is his brother. He is the worst of all of this terrible family.í             

 ìIt was very difficult for the boy to find the strength to speak. But he spoke with a dreadful passion.             

 ìëWe were robbed by that man standing there, the way all peasants are robbed by nobles. We were taxed mercilessly and forced to work for him without pay. We were forced to grind our corn at his mill and forced to feed our poor crops to his tame birds. We werenít allowed to keep any tame birds ourselves. We were robbed and abused so much that when we did have the luck to have a bit of meat to eat, we ate it in fear, with the door barred and the shutters closed so no one would see it and take it away from us. We were robbed, hunted, and made so poor that our father told us that it was a terrible thing to bring a child into the world. He told us that we should pray that our women would be unable to give birth and that our family would die out!í              

 ìI had never seen someone speak of their oppression so passionately before. I had assumed that it had to be deep down inside the peasants somewhere, but I had never seen it break out until I saw this dying boy.              

 ìëNevertheless, Doctor, my sister got married. Her husband was sick at the time, the poor fellow. She married the man she loved so that she could take care of him and comfort him in our cottageóour doghouse, as that man would call it. She had only been married a few weeks when that manís brother saw her and was attracted to her. He asked her husband to lend her to him. What terrible husbands are there among us! The husband was willing enough, but my sister was good and virtuous. She hated this manís brother as much as I did. What did the two brothers do then to persuade her husband to convince her to go through with it?í             

 ìThe boy had been staring into my eyes. He slowly turned to the brothers, and I saw in their faces that everything he said was true. The pride of the boy confronted the pride of the two brothers. Even here in the Bastille I can see the gentlemanís indifference and the oppressed boyís desire for revenge.             

 ìëYou know, Doctor, that these nobles have the right to harness us to carts like common dogs and drive us through the fields. So, they harnessed her husband to a cart and drove him. You know that they have the right to make us stay outside on the grounds all night keeping the frogs quiet so that the noblesí sleep isnít disturbed. They kept him out in the cold mists at night and ordered him back into a harness during the day. But he was not persuaded. No! One day at noon he was taken out of his harness to eatóif he could find anything to eat. He sobbed twelve timesóonce for every stroke of the bell. Then he died in her arms.í             

 ìNothing could have kept the boy alive except for his determination to tell how they had been wronged. He fought back death the way he forced his right hand to remain clenched over his wound.              

 ìëThen, this man gave his brother permission to have his way with her. He even helped him to take her away, despite what I know she must have told his brother. You will know what she told him soon, Doctor, if you do not know already. His brother took her away for his pleasure and enjoyment for a little while. I saw her pass me on the road. When I told everyone at home, my fatherís heart burst and he died. He never said a word. I took my younger sisterófor I have anotherósomewhere where this man could never reach her and where, at least, she will never be his slave. Then I followed the brother here. Last night I climbed in his window. I was still a common peasant, but I had a sword in my handóWhere is the loft window? It was somewhere here?í             

 ìThe room was growing dark to him. The world was growing narrow around him. I looked around me and saw that the hay and straw had been trampled all over the floor, as if there had been a struggle there.             

 ìëMy sister heard me and ran in. I told her not to come near us until he was dead. He came in, and first he threw me some pieces of money. Then he struck at me with a whip. But I, though a common peasant, struck him hard enough to make him draw his sword. Let him break his sword, stained with my peasant blood, into as many pieces as he can. He drew to defend himself and used all his skill to stab me.í             

 ìI had seen a few moments before that the broken sword was lying among the hay. It was a gentlemanís weapon. In another place, an old sword lied on the ground. It looked like it had belonged to a soldier.              

 ìëNow lift me up, Doctor. Lift me up. Where is he?í             

 ìëHe is not here,í I said, supporting the boy. I assumed he was speaking of the brother.              

 ìëHe! As proud as these nobles are, he is afraid to see me. Where is the man who was here? Turn my face so I can see him.í             

 ìI did so, raising the boyís head against my knee. But with a sudden surge of strength, he raised himself up completely. I had to rise too or I could not have supported him.              

 ìëMarquis,í said the boy, turned toward him with his eyes opened wide and his right hand raised. ëWhen the time comes when all things are answered for, I call you and your descendants, to the very end of your family line, to answer for them. I mark you with this cross of blood to show what I do. When the time comes when these things are to be answered for, I call your brother, the worst of your terrible family, to answer for them on his own. I mark him with this cross of blood to show what I do.í             

 ìTwice he put his hand to the wound in his chest and drew a cross in the air with his finger. He stood for a moment with his finger still raised. As it dropped, he dropped with it, and lied down dead.î              

 ***             

 ìWhen I went back to the bedside of the young woman, I found her screaming exactly as she had been before. I knew that this might go on for many hours and would probably end with her death.             

 ìI gave her the same medicines again and sat at her bedside late through the night. Her screams never became less piercing. She never stumbled over her words or changed their order. She always said, ìMy husband, my father, and my brother! One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve. Hush!í             

 ìThis went on for twenty-six hours after I had first seen her. I had come and gone twice and was sitting beside her again when she began to weaken. I did what little I could to help her calm down. Soon she sank into a stupor and lied there like she was dead.              

 ìIt was as if the wind and rain had finally stopped after a long, frightening storm. I let go of her arms and called the peasant woman to help me adjust her and her torn dress. It was then that I realized that she was newly pregnant, and it was then that I lost what little hope I had of her recovery.              

 ìëIs she dead?í asked the marquis, whom I will still call the older brother. He came into the room wearing the boots he had been riding his horse in.              

 ìëSheís not dead,í I said. ëBut it is likely that she will die.í             

 ìëThese peasantsí bodies are so strong!í he said. He looked down at her with curiosity.             

 ìëThere is great strength in sorrow and despair,í I answered.              

 ìAt first he laughed at my words, then he frowned. He moved a chair close to mine with his foot and ordered the peasant woman to leave. He said, quietly:             

 ìëDoctor, when I found my brother in this difficult situation with these beastly peasants, I suggested that we ask for your help. You have a good reputation. As a young man who is trying to make his fortune, you are aware of your own self-interest. The things that you have seen here are not to be spoken of.í             

 ìI listened to the patientís breathing and didnít answer.             

 ìëAre you paying attention, Doctor?í              

 ìëMonsieur, in my profession, the things said by a patient are always kept secret,í I said. I was careful with my answer, because I was troubled by what I had seen and heard.              

 ìIt was so difficult to tell if she was breathing that I carefully felt her pulse and heartbeat. She was alive, but barely. Looking around, I took my seat again. The brothers were watching me carefully.î              

 ***             

 ìIt is very difficult for me to write. It is so cold, and I am so afraid of being discovered and sent to an underground cell in total darkness, that I must cut my story short. I am not confusedómy memory is still sharp, and I can remember every word that was spoken between those brothers and me.              

 ìShe lasted for a week. Toward the end I could understand a few syllables that she said to me if I put my ear close to her lips. She asked me where she was, and I told her. She asked me who I was, and I told her. I asked her for her family name, but she wouldnít tell me. She shook her head a little on her pillow and kept her secret, as the boy had done.             

 ìI had no chance to ask her any questions until I had told the brothers that she was fading fast and would not live another day. Until then, although no one was ever present with us except for the peasant woman and myself, one of the brothers had always sat behind the curtain at the head of the bed when I was there. When they realized that she was going to die, though, they didnít seem to care what conversation I had with her. The thought passed through my mind that it was as if I were dying too.              

 ìI always noticed that their pride caused them to resent the fact that the younger brother, as I call him, had had a swordfight with a peasant, and that the peasant was just a boy. The only thing that appeared to bother them was the idea that this was degrading to their family and undignified. Whenever I looked into the younger brotherís eyes, I could tell that he strongly disliked me for knowing what I had heard from the boy. He was gentler and more polite to me than the older brother was, but I could see this. I also saw that it bothered the older brother, too.              

 ìThe young woman died two hours before midnight. By my watch it was almost the exact time that I had first seen her. I was alone with her when her sad, young head drooped gently to one side, and all her earthly suffering ended.              

 ìThe brothers were waiting in a room downstairs, impatient to ride away. I had heard them while I was alone at the bedside hitting their boots with their riding whips and pacing up and down.              

 ìIs she finally dead?î asked the older brother when I went in.              

 ìëShe is dead,î I said.              

 ìëCongratulations, brother,í was what he said as he turned around.              

 ìHe had offered me money before, which I had avoided taking. Now he gave me a   rouleau a stack of coins wrapped in a paper cylinder  rouleau  of gold. I took it from him but laid it on the table. I had thought about it before and had decided not to accept anything from them.              

 ìëPlease excuse me,í I said. ëBut I canít accept this under the circumstances.í             

  ìThey looked at each other but bowed to me as I bowed to them. We parted ways without saying another word.î              

 ***             

 ìI am tired, tired, tired. I am worn down by suffering, and I canít read what I have written with this thin hand of mine.              

 ìEarly in the morning, the rouleau had been left at my door in a little box with my name written on it. Immediately, I thought anxiously about what I should do. I decided that day to write privately to the minister telling him about the patients that I had been summoned to help and where I had gone. In other words, I told him everything. I knew what influence certain people had at court and that nobles were often beyond punishment. I expected that the matter would never be heard of, but I wanted to relieve my own mind. I had kept the matter a secret from everyone, even my wife, and I decided to say this in the letter. I had no fear of being in any real danger, but I was worried that other people might be in danger if they knew what I knew.              

 ìI was very busy that day and couldnít finish my letter than night. I rose much earlier than my usual time the next morning to finish it. It was the last day of the year. The finished the letter was lying in front of me when I was told that a lady had arrived and was waiting to see me.î              

 ***             

 ìI am growing more and more incapable of finishing the task I have set myself. Itís so cold and so dark. My senses are so dulled and I am so dreadfully unhappy.              

 ìThe lady was young and beautiful but didnít look like she would live long. She was very upset. She told me she was the wife of the Marquis Saint Evremonde. I realized that this was the title by which the boy had addressed the older brother, and that this was what the letter E embroidered on the scarf meant. It was clear to me that I had seen the Marquis Saint Evremonde very recently.              

 ìMy memory is still accurate, but I cannot write down the exact words of our conversation. I suspect that I am being watched more closely than before, and I donít know when I might be watched. She had partly suspected and partly discovered the main facts of the terrible story and what part her husband had played in it. She knew that I had been brought to help, but she didnít know that the girl was dead. She told me that she had hoped to secretly show her a womanís sympathy. She had hoped to keep the wrath of Heaven from her noble family, which had long mistreated the suffering commoners.             

 ìShe believed there was a younger sister who was still alive, and she wanted most of all to help the sister. I could only tell her that the sister existed. I knew nothing beyond that. She had come to me secretly in hopes that I could tell her their name and where they lived. To this day I donít know either.î              

 ***             

 ìThese scraps of paper will get me in trouble. One of them was taken away from me yesterday, with a warning. I have to finish my story today.              

 ìShe was a good, kind lady, and she was not happy in her marriage. How could she be! The brother distrusted and disliked her. Everything he did was in opposition to her. She was afraid of him and afraid of her husband, too. When I led her to the door there was a child in her carriage, a pretty boy between two and three years old.              

 ìëFor his sake, Doctor,í she said, pointing to him and crying, ëI would do everything I could to make up for this. He will never enjoy his inheritance otherwise. I have a fear that if no one else pays for this wrong, one day he will have to pay for it himself. I will make it the first duty of his life to give what little I have left to this wronged family, with the compassion and sympathy of his dead mother. Itís not more than the value of a few jewels, if the sister can be discovered.í             

 ìShe kissed the boy and caressed him and said, ëItís for your own sake. You will be faithful to me, wonít you, little Charles?í The child answered bravely, ëYes!í I kissed her hand and she took him in her arms, and went away caressing him. I never saw her again.              

 ìSince she had mentioned her husbandís name as if she thought I already knew it, I did not add it to my letter. I sealed my letter. I was afraid to give it to anyone else, so I delivered it myself that same day.              

 ìIt was December 31st. Near nine oíclock that night a man dressed in black rang the bell at my gate. He demanded to see me and quietly followed my young servant, Ernest Defarge, upstairs. When my servant came into the room where I sat with my wifeóoh, my wife, I loved her! My fair young English wife!ówe saw the man, who was supposed to be waiting at the gate, standing behind him.          

 ìHe said that there was an urgent case in the Rue Saint Honore. He said it wouldnít take long. He had a coach waiting.              

 ìThe coach brought me here to the Bastille, where I will die. When I was away from the house, a black scarf was tied tightly over my mouth from behind and my arms were pinned. The two brothers crossed the road from a dark corner. They gestured that I was the man they were looking for. The marquis took the letter I had written out of his pocket and showed it to me. He burned it in the light of the lantern he was holding and put out the burning ashes with his foot. They didnít say a word. I was brought here to my cell. It is like a living grave.             

 ìIf God had put it in the heart of either of the brothers, in all these frightening years, to give me any news of how my wife is doingóeven just to know if she were alive or deadóI might have thought that God hadnít abandoned them. But now I believe that the mark of the cross that the dying boy had made with his blood is fatal to them, and that they will not receive His mercy. I, Alexandre Manette, a sad prisoner, do tonight, December 31st, 1767, in my unbearable suffering, denounce the Evremonde brothers and all their descendants to the last of their family, to the time when these things will be answered for. I denounce them to Heaven and Earth.î             

 A terrible sound was heard when the reading of the document had finishedóan eager, hungry, blood-chilling scream. The story called up the most revengeful passions of the time, and every head in all of France dropped before it.             

 There was no need, in front of that tribunal, and with that terrible sound, to show that the Defarges had hidden that paper and not made it public. That they had put it with the other items taken from the Bastille that were paraded around and had kept it, waiting for the right time. There was no need to show that the family of Evremonde had been hated for a long time by the people of Saint Antoine, and was on the list of people to be executed. There is no man alive whose virtues would have saved him against such denunciation.             

 It was that much worse for Darnay that Dr. Manette, the man who was denouncing him, was a well-known citizen, his own friend, and the father of his wife. One of the hopes of the people was to imitate the questionable virtues of ancient times and for people to sacrifice themselves for the good of the public. Therefore, the president said (or else his own head would have been in danger of being cut off) that the good doctor would help the Republic even more by destroying an obnoxious family of aristocrats, and that he would doubtlessly glow with joy and pride by making his daughter a widow and her child an orphan. At that, the crowd went wild with excitement and patriotic passion, and there was not a touch of human sympathy among them.              

 ìThe doctor has a lot of influence, does he?î murmured Madame Defarge, smiling to The Vengeance. ìLetís see if you can save him now, Doctor!î             

 The crowd roared every time one of the members of the jury voted. Another and another, roar after roar.              

 The vote was unanimous. He was an aristocrat, by family and in his heart. He was an enemy of the Republic and an oppressor of the people. They voted to send him back to the Conciergerie and executed within the next twenty-four hours!             

 Lucie fainted as the sentence was pronounced, as if she had been struck down dead. But she made no sound. The strong voice inside her reminded her that she of all people could support Charles in his misery and that she shouldn't add to it. This thought quickly awoke her from the shock.              

 The judges had to leave to take part in a public demonstration outdoors, so the tribunal adjourned. The noise and movement of people leaving the courtroom by various hallways was still going on when Lucie stood and reached out to her husband. There was nothing in the expression on her face but love and consolation.              

 ìIf I could touch him! If I could embrace him just once! Oh, good citizens, will you have compassion for us?î             

 There was only one jailer left, along with two of the four men who had taken him the night before. Barsad was there, too. The people had all gone outside to the demonstration in the streets. Barsad suggested to the others, ìLet her embrace him. Itís only for a moment.î They agreed silently and helped her move over the seats in the hall to a place higher up where Darnay could embrace her by leaning over the   dock the area in a law court where the accused stands during a trial  dock .             

 ìFarewell, darling. This is the last blessing I will give you. We will meet again in Heaven, where the weary finally rest!î             

 This is what Darnay said to Lucie as he held her to his chest.              

 ìI can bear it, my dear Charles. God above supports me. Donít worry about me. Give me a parting blessing for our daughter.î             

 ìI send it to her through you. I kiss her by kissing you. I say farewell to her by saying it to you.î             

 ìMy husband. No! One moment!î He was pulling himself apart from her. ìWe will not be separated long. I feel that this will break my heart and that I will die soon, but I will take care of her while I can. When I die, God will send friends to take care of her, as He did for me.î             

 Her father had followed her. He would have fallen to his knees in front of both of them, but Darnay reached out his hand and took hold of him, crying:             

 ìNo, no! What have you done that should make you kneel before us? We know now how much you struggled before. We know now what you went through when you suspected my family history and when you learned that it was true. We know now the feelings of hatred toward me that you fought against and conquered for the sake of your daughter. We thank you with all our hearts, and all our love and duty. Heaven be with you!î             

 Dr. Manetteís only answer was to run his hands through his white hair, then wring them with a cry of anguish.              

 ìIt could not be otherwise,î said Darnay. ìThis was inevitable. It was always useless to ignore my poor motherís trust that first brought my deadly presence near you. Good could never come from such evil. A happier end could never come from such an unhappy beginning. Take comfort and forgive me. Heaven bless you!î             

 Lucie let go of him as the guards pulled him away. She stood watching him, her hands clasped together in a position of prayer. She had a radiant look on her face and was even smiling comfortingly. As he went out through the prisonersí door, she turned and put her head lovingly on her fatherís breast, tried to speak to him, and fell at his feet.              

 Then, Sydney Carton came out of the hidden corner from which he had never moved and picked her up. Only her father and Mr. Lorry were with her. His arm trembled as he raised her and supported her head, yet there was a manner about him that wasnít all pity. There was something proud in him.             

 ìShall I take her to a coach? Sheís so light, I won't even feel her weight.î             

 He carried her easily to the door and laid her tenderly down in a coach. Her father and Mr. Lorry got into it, and Carton took his seat beside the driver.          

 They arrived at the gate where he had stopped in the dark just a few hours before to wonder which cobblestones Lucie had walked on. He lifted her again and carried her up the staircase to their apartment. There, he laid her down on a couch, and her daughter and Miss Pross wept over her.              

 ìDonít revive her,î he said softly to Miss Pross. ìShe is better off unconscious. She has only fainted.î             

 ìOh, Carton, Carton, dear Carton!î cried little Lucie. She jumped up and threw her arms around him passionately, in a burst of grief. ìNow that you have come, I think youíll do something to help Mamma and save Papa! Oh, look at her, dear Carton! Can you, of all the people who love her, stand to see her like this?î             

 He leaned over the child and laid her cheek against his face. He pulled her off of him gently and looked at her unconscious mother.              

 ìBefore I go,î he said, pausing, ìmay I kiss her?î             

 They remembered afterward that when he bent down and kissed her face, he murmured some words. Little Lucie, who was closest to him, told them afterward, and told her grandchildren when she was an old woman, that she heard him say, ìA life you love.î             

 When he had gone into the next room, he turned suddenly toward Mr. Lorry and her father, who were following him. He said to the doctor:             

 ìYou had great influence as recently as yesterday, Dr. Manette. At least try to use it again. These judges and all of these men in power are very friendly to you. They know very well what you have done, donít they?î             

 ìNothing about Charles was hidden from me when he was in prison. I was assured that I would definitely save him, and I did.î He answered with great difficulty and very slowly.              

 ìTry to use your influence again. There isnít much time between now and tomorrow afternoon, but try.î             

 ìI intend to try. I wonít rest for a moment.î             

 ìGood. I have known energy like yours to do great things before now, though neveróî he added smiling and sighing ìóas great as this. But try! Our life is worth so little when we misuse it. It is worth at least this effort. Our lives would be worth nothing if it werenít.î             

 ìI will go to the prosecutor and the president right away,î said Dr. Manette. ìAnd I will go to the others whom I shouldnít name. I will write too, andóbut wait! There is a celebration in the streets. I wonít be able to reach anyone until itís dark.î             

 ìThatís true. Well! It is a desperate hope at best. Itís not much more desperate if itís delayed until dark. Iíll want to know how you do. But remember! I don't expect anything. When are you likely to meet with these powerful people, Dr. Manette?î             

 ìImmediately after dark, I hope. Within an hour or two from now.î             

 ìIt will be dark soon after four oíclock. If I go to Mr. Lorryís at nine, will I be able to hear how you have done, either from a friend or from yourself?î             

 ìYes.î             

 ìGood luck!î             

 Mr. Lorry followed Sydney to the outer door. He touched him on the shoulder as he was going away, causing him to turn around.              

 ìI have no hope,î said Mr. Lorry, in a quiet, sorrowful whisper.              

 ìNeither have I.î             

 ìIf any one of these men, or even all of these men, wanted to spare himówhich is asking a lot, for what do they care about his life, or any manís life?óI doubt that they would dare to do it after the way the crowd reacted in the courtroom today.î             

 ìSo do I. I heard the sound of an axe falling in their screams.î             

 Mr. Lorry leaned his arm on the doorpost and buried his face in it.              

 ìDonít worry,î said Carton very gently. ìDonít grieve. I encouraged Dr. Manette in this idea because I felt that it might one day make Lucie feel better. Otherwise, she might think to herself, 'his life was thrown away or wasted,' and that might upset her.î             

 ìYes, yes, yes,î answered Mr. Lorry, wiping the tears from his eyes. ìYouíre right. But he will die. There is no real hope.î             

 ìYes. He will die. There is no real hope,î repeated Carton.              

 And with that, Carton walked confidently downstairs.              

 Sydney Carton paused in the street, unsure where to go. ìWeíre meeting at Tellsonís Bank at nine oíclock,î he said, thinking it over. ìWould it be good to be seen in public in the meantime? I think so. Itís best that people know that a man that looks like me is here in Paris. Itís a smart precaution to take, and it might be necessary to prepare for later. But wait! Let me think it over!î             

 He had started walking toward his goal, but now he stopped. He turned around once or twice in the street, which was already growing dark. He thought through his plan to see what the possible results might be. His first thought was confirmed. ìItís best that these people know that a man that looks like me is here,î he said, finally deciding. He turned and headed toward Saint Antoine.          

 Defarge had described himself that day at the court as the owner of a wine shop in the suburb of Saint Antoine. It wasnít hard for someone who knew the city well to find his house without asking any questions. Carton found out where it was and came out of those narrow streets again. He ate dinner at an inn and fell fast asleep after dinner. For the first time in many years, he did not drink any strong alcohol. Since the night before, he had drunk nothing but a little light, weak wine, and he had poured his brandy slowly out on Mr. Lorryís hearth like a man who would never drink again.              

 It was as late as seven oíclock in the evening when he awoke refreshed and went out into the streets again. As he walked toward Saint Antoine he stopped at a shop window where there was a mirror. He slightly rearranged the messy appearance of his loose   cravat a scarf or piece of fabric worn around a manís neck and tied in front  cravat , the collar of his coat, and his wild hair. Having finished, he went directly to Defargeís wine shop and went in.              

 There were no other customers in the shop besides Jacques Three, the man with the restless fingers and the rough voice. Jacques Three, whom Carton had seen on the jury, stood drinking at the little counter. He was talking to Monsieur and Madame Defarge. The Vengeance was also talking with them, like a regular visitor to the shop.              

 Carton walked in, took a seat, and asked for a small measure of wine in very poor French. Madame Defarge glanced at him carelessly. Then she looked closer and closer, and went over to him herself and asked what he had ordered.              

 He repeated his order.             

 ìAre you English?î Madame Defarge asked, raising her dark eyebrows at him questioningly.             

 After looking at her, as if he had difficulty understanding even a single French word, he answered in a strong English accent, ìYes, Madame. I am English.î             

 Madame Defarge went back to the counter to get the wine. Carton picked up a journal on   Jacobins a political club formed during the French Revolution  Jacobins  and pretended to read it as if trying to understand it. He heard her say, ìI swear to you, he looks like Evremonde!î             

 Defarge brought him his wine and wished him a good evening.             

 ìHow?î Carton asked in poor French.             

 ìGood evening.î             

 ìOh! Good evening, citizen,î said Carton, filling his glass. ìAh! and good wine. I toast my glass to the Republic.î             

 Defarge went back to the counter. He said, ìHe certainly looks a little like him.î Madame answered firmly, ìI tell you, he looks a lot like him.î Jacques Three said soothingly, ìYou have been thinking about him so much that you are starting to see him everywhere, madame.î The Vengeance added, laughing, ìYes! And you are so anxious to see him one last time tomorrow at his execution!î             

 Carton pretended to work strenuously at reading his paper, following the words with his finger. He looked completely absorbed. They were all leaning their arms on the counter and were close together, speaking quietly. They all looked at him for a few moments in silence without distracting him from his Jacobin journal. Then they resumed their conversation.              

 ìItís true what Madame Defarge says,î said Jacques Three. ìWhy stop now? That makes a lot of sense. Why stop now?î             

 ìWell, well,î reasoned Defarge. ìBut we have to stop somewhere. After all, the question is, where do we stop?î             

 ìWe stop after they have been exterminated,î said Madame Defarge.              

 ìWonderful!î said Jacques Three, hoarsely. The Vengeance also enthusiastically approved.              

 ìExtermination is a good policy, my wifeî said Defarge, rather troubled. ìIn general I have nothing against it. But Dr. Manette has suffered a great deal. You saw him today. You saw his face when they read the paper he had written in prison.î             

 ìI saw his face!î repeated Madame Defarge hatefully and angrily. ìYes. I saw his face. I see that his face is not the face of a true friend to the Republic. Let him worry about his face!î             

 ìAnd you have seen how much his daughter has suffered,î said Defarge to his wife disapprovingly. ìHer suffering must torture him!î             

 ìI have seen his daughter,î repeated Madame Defarge. ìYes, I have seen his daughter several times. I saw her today and I have seen her other days. I have seen her in court and I have seen her in the street by the prison. Let me just raise a fingeróî Carton thought that she raised it, although he never looked up from his paper. She let it fall with a rattle on the edge of the counter in front of her, as if it were an axe falling.              

 ìMadame Defarge is superb!î said Jacques Three hoarsely.              

 ìShe is an angel!í said The Vengeance. She embraced Madame Defarge.              

 ìAs far as you are concerned,î continued Madame Defarge unforgivingly to her husband, ìif it depended on youówhich, fortunately, it does notóyou would rescue Darnay right now.î             

 ìNo!î Defarge argued. ìNot even if I could save him just by raising this glass! But I would end it there. I say we should stop there.î             

 ìSee you then, Jacques,î said Madame Defarge wrathfully. ìAnd see you too, Vengeance. Iíll see you both. Listen! I have the Evremonde family on my list for other crimes as tyrants and oppressors. They are doomed to be destroyed and exterminated. Ask my husband if itís true.î             

 ìItís true,î Defarge agreed, without being asked.              

 ìDefarge found the paper we heard read today in the first days of the Revolution ,when the Bastille fell. He brought it home, and in the middle of the night, when this shop was empty and closed up, we read it. Right here by the light of this lamp. Ask him if itís true.î             

 ìItís true,î agreed Defarge.              

 ìThat night, after we had read through the paper, the lamp had burned out and the daylight was shining in above those shutters and between those iron bars. I told him I had a secret to tell him. Ask him if itís true.î             

 ìItís true,î agreed Defarge.              

 ìI told him my secret. I struck my chest with these two hands as I strike it now, and I told him, ëDefarge, I was raised by fishermen on the seashore. The peasant family harmed so badly by the two Evremonde brothers, as described in the paper from the Bastille, is my family. Defarge, that sister of the wounded boy who died on the ground was my sister. That husband who was killed was my sisterís husband. That unborn child she carried was their child. That brother was my brother. That father was my father. Those dead people are my dead. The responsibility to bring the guilty to justice belongs to me!í Ask him if itís true.î             

 ìItís true,î agreed Defarge once more.              

 ìThen tell the wind and fire where to stop,î answered Madame Defarge. ìBut donít tell me.î             

 Jacques Three and The Vengeance seemed to enjoy hearing the reasons for her wrath, and both praised her highly. Carton could feel how angry she was without looking at her. Defarge was a weak minority in the group. He added a few words about the memory of the compassionate wife of the marquis, but his wife only repeated her last answer. ìTell the wind and fire where to stop, but donít tell me!î             

 Customers came into the wine shop and the group split up. Carton paid for his wine and counted out his change as though French money confused him. He asked for directions to the National Palace as if he were a stranger to the city. Madame Defarge took him to the door. She put her arm on his as she pointed out the road. Carton had the thought that he could do a good deed by lifting her arm, stabbing her in her side, and killing her.             

 Instead, he went on his way, and he was soon standing in the shadow of the prison wall. At nine oíclock, he left and went to Mr. Lorryís room again, where he found him pacing anxiously back and forth in restless anxiety. He said he had been with Lucie until just recently, and that he had only left her for a few minutes to come and keep his appointment. Dr. Manette hadnít been seen since he left the bank just before four oíclock. Lucie had some faint hope that the doctor could intervene and save Charles, but that hope was small. He had been gone for more than five hours. Where could he be?             

 Mr. Lorry waited until ten oíclock, and Dr. Manette still hadnít returned. He didnít want to leave Lucie alone any longer, so they decided he would go back to Lucie and return to the bank again at midnight. In the meantime, Carton would wait for the doctor alone by the fire.              

 Carton waited and waited. The clock struck twelve, and Dr. Manette had still not come back. Mr. Lorry returned and learned that no one had heard from the doctor. He had brought no news of him either. Where could he be?             

 They were discussing this question, and were starting to believe his absence might mean he'd had some success, when they heard him coming up the stairs. As soon as he entered the room, it was obvious that there was no hope.              

 They never learned whether he had really been to see anyone or whether he had been out walking the streets the whole time. He stood there staring at them, and they didnít ask him any questions. The expression on his face told them everything.              

 ìI canít find it,î he said. ìAnd I need it. Where is it?î             

 His head and throat were bare. He looked around the room distractedly as he spoke, took his coat off, and let it drop on the floor.              

 ìWhere is my bench? Iíve been looking everywhere for my bench, and I canít find it. What have they done with the shoes I was working on? Iím running out of time. I must finish those shoes.î             

 Carton and Mr. Lorry looked at each other, devastated.              

 ìCome, come!î he said, whimpering miserably. ìLet me get to work. Give me my work.î             

 When he didnít get an answer he tore at his hair and pounded his feet on the floor like an angry child.              

 ìDonít torture a poor, sad wretch,î he begged them, screaming. ìGive me my work! What will happen to us if I donít finish those shoes tonight?î             

 All was lost!              

 It was clear that there was no point in reasoning with him or trying to revive him. Carton and Mr. Lorry both put a hand on his shoulder as if they had agreed to do so. They told him soothingly to sit down in front of the fire, and they promised him that he would have his work soon. He sank into the chair, staring into the embers, and started to cry. It was as if everything that had happened since he had been making shoes in the attic in Saint Antoine had been a dream. Mr. Lorry saw the doctor shrink into the exact same man that Defarge had kept at his shop.              

 Carton and Mr. Lorry were both terrified to see him in such horrible shape, but it wasnít the time to give in to such emotions. They both thought of Lucie. She had now lost the only person whom she could rely on and who could give her hope. Again, as if they had agreed to do so, they looked at each other and knew what they needed to do. Carton spoke first:             

 ìWe have lost our last chance. It wasnít much. Yes. We had better take Dr. Manette to see Lucie. But before you go, will you listen to me for a moment? Donít ask me why I demand the conditions I am about to make, or why I demand the promise I am going to ask. I have a good reason.î             

 ìIím sure that you do,î answered Mr. Lorry. ìGo on.î             

 Dr. Manette was rocking back and forth and moaning the whole time as he sat in a chair between them. They spoke quietly, as if they were sitting by a patientís sickbed at night.              

 Carton bent over to pick up the coat. It lay on the floor and was almost wrapped around his feet. As he did so, a small case in which the doctor carried his list of the dayís duties fell on the floor. Carton picked it up, and there was a folded paper in it. ìWe should look at this!î he said. Mr. Lorry nodded in agreement. He opened it and exclaimed, ìThank God!î             

 ìWhat is it? ì Mr. Lorry asked anxiously.             

 ìGive me a moment. Let me talk about it in context.î He put his hand in his coat pocket and took out another piece of paper. ìThis is a certificate that allows me to leave Paris. Look at it. You see? It says, ëSydney Carton, an Englishman.íî             

 Mr. Lorry held it open in his hand and looked at Cartonís face.              

 ìHold onto it for me until tomorrow. You remember that I am going to go see Darnay tomorrow. I'd better not bring it with me into the prison.î             

 ìWhy not?î             

 ìI donít know. Iíd prefer not to. Now, take this paper that Dr. Manette has been carrying with him. It is a similar certificate, which allows Lucie and her daughter to cross the barrier out of Paris at any time. You see?î             

 ìYes!î             

 ìPerhaps he got it as his last safety measure yesterday. When is it dated? It doesnít matter. Donít stay to look. Tuck it away carefully with my certificate and your own. Now, look! I never doubted until the past hour or two that he had, or could get, a paper like this. It is valid until it is revoked, but it may be revoked soon, and I have reason to think that it will be.î              

 ìThey are not in danger?î             

 ìThey are in great danger. They are in danger of being accused by Madame Defarge. I heard it from her own lips. I have overheard things she said tonight that make it clear they are in great danger. I didnít waste time. I went to see Barsad right away, and he confirmed it for me. He knows that a wood sawyer who lives by the prison wall is under the influence of Monsieur and Madame Defarge. They have told him to say that he has seen 'her'óhe never mentioned Lucieís nameómaking signs and signals to the prisoners. Itís easy to see that they will make the usual claimóthat she is involved in a prison plot. They will accuse Lucie, and possibly her daughter and her father, since they have all been seen there. Donít look so horrified. You will save all of them.î             

 ìI hope to Heaven that I will, Carton. But how?î             

 ìI will tell you how. It will depend on you, and there is no better man than you to depend on. This new accusation will certainly not take place until after tomorrow, probably not until two or three days afterward. Itís more likely that it will be a week afterward. You know it is a capital crime to mourn for or sympathize with someone who is executed at the guillotine, so she and her father will without a doubt be guilty of this crime. Madame Defarge, who will stop at nothing, will add that accusation to her case and make sure that they are convicted. You follow me?î             

 ìIím listening so closely, and with so much confidence that what you say is true, that for the moment I have even forgotten about this problem,î Mr. Lorry said, touching the back of the doctorís chair.              

 ìYou have money. You can pay for the quickest possible means of travel to the seacoast. You made plans to return to England some days ago. Have your horses made ready early tomorrow so that they can leave at two oíclock in the afternoon.î             

 ìI will do it!î             

 Carton was so passionate and inspiring that it made Mr. Lorry as eager as a young man.              

 ìYou are a good man. Did I say that there is no better man we could depend on? Tell Lucie tonight about the danger you know regarding her child and father. Focus on that, because she would happily die along with her husband.î He hesitated for a moment and then continued on as before. ìTell her that, for the sake of her child and father, she needs to leave Paris with her daughter, her father, and you at that time. Tell her it was the last arrangement her husband made. Tell her that more depends on it than she would dare believe or hope. You think that her father, even as disturbed as he is, will go with her, donít you?î             

 ìIím sure of it.î             

 ìI thought so. Make these arrangements quietly and quickly in the courtyard outside. You should even go so far as to already be sitting in the carriage. The moment I come to you, take me into the carriage and drive away.î             

 ìI should wait for you under any circumstances, yes?î             

 ìYou have my travel certificate in your hand with the others, you know, and will save my place. Wait for nothing else except to have my place in the carriage filled, then leave for England!î             

 ìWhy, then,î said Mr. Lorry, grasping his eager, steady hand, ìit doesnít all depend on me, an old man. I will have a strong, young man by my side helping me.î             

 ìWith Heavenís help you will! Promise me that nothing will make you change the plan that we have agreed on.î             

 ìNothing, Carton.î             

 ìRemember this conversation tomorrow. If you change the plan, or delay for any reason, no oneís life can possibly be saved, and many lives will be sacrificed.î             

 ìI will remember it. I hope to do my part faithfully.î             

 ìAnd I hope to do mine. Now, goodbye!î             

 Though he said it with a sincere smile and even kissed Mr. Lorryís hand, he didnít leave him yet. He helped him get Dr. Manette, who was rocking back and forth in front of the dying embers in the fireplace, to his feet. They helped him put a cloak and a hat on, and they lured him outside by telling him that they were looking for the hidden bench and shoes that he was crying out for. Carton walked on the other side of the doctor and protected him as they walked through the courtyard of the Manetteís house. Lucie was there. She was so sad now, and she had been so happy back when Carton had told her of his feelings for her. Carton entered the courtyard and remained there for a few minutes alone, looking up at the light coming from her window. Before he went away, he said a blessing for her and said goodbye.              

 In the dark prison of the Conciergerie, the condemned prisoners waited to be executed. The number of condemned prisoners was the same as the number of weeks in a year. Fifty-two people were to be carted through the city streets to their deaths, and new prisoners were assigned to their cells before they had even left them. Before the condemned were killed, the next round of condemned prisoners had already been named.              

 Fifty-two names were read out: from the seventy-year-old farmer-general whose wealth couldnít save him, to the twenty-year-old seamstress, whose poverty and insignificance couldnít save her. Sickness caused by immoral behavior and self-neglect will infect people of any social class. The frightening moral sickness that came from unspeakable suffering, oppression, and heartless apathy also struck down its victims regardless of their position in life.              

 Charles Darnay was alone in a cell. He had no delusions about being saved since he came to the cell from the tribunal. He knew that every word of the story he had heard condemned him to death. He had fully understood that no personís influence could possibly save him. It was as if all the millions of people of France had pronounced his sentence, so one person alone could do nothing to help him.              

 Nevertheless, it wasnít easy to prepare his mind for his coming death. He kept picturing his beloved wifeís face. He had many reasons to live, and it was hard to let go. When he let go of one reason to live, another made him want to hold on tighter. When he came to terms with that and let go a little, the other would tighten. His thinking was rushed, too, and his heart beat rapidly, working against his acceptance of death. If he were able to come to terms with death for a moment, the thought of his wife and child, who would have to go on living without him, would make him feel that he was being selfish.              

 But this only happened at first. Before long he had the thought that there was no shame in dying this way. The thought that many innocent people died the same way and faced it bravely every day made him feel better. He realized that he had to face death with quiet strength if he wanted his family to have any peace of mind in the future. Little by little he calmed down to a state where he could think happier thoughts and take some comfort.              

 This was his state of mind before it had grown dark on the night Darnay was condemned. He was allowed to buy a light and some things to write with, and he sat down to write until the time when the prison lamps had to be put out.          

 He wrote a long letter to Lucie and told her that he hadnít known anything about her fatherís imprisonment until she had told him herself. He told her he didnít know anything about his fatherís and uncleís roles in that imprisonment until Dr. Manetteís paper had been read. He had already explained to her that he had hidden his real name from her because it was the one condition that her father had made when he agreed to let them be married. It made sense now, and the doctor had held him to this promise on the morning of their marriage. He begged her, for her fatherís sake, never to try to find out if her father had forgotten about the existence of the paper, or if he had remembered it after Darnay told the story about the Tower of London that Sunday long ago under the plane tree in the garden. If he had remembered any of it, he surely would have assumed it had been destroyed when the Bastille fell, since he had not heard it mentioned with the other belongings that people had found there and told the world about. He begged heróthough he added that he knew asking wasnít necessaryóto comfort her father by letting him know in every way she could think of that he hadnít done anything he should blame himself for. He had forgotten all about it for both of their sakes. Next, as they would one day meet in Heaven, he begged her to preserve the memory of his love for her, to overcome her sorrow, and to devote herself to their child and to comforting her father.          

 He wrote a similar letter to Dr. Manette, telling the doctor specifically that he left Lucie and their daughter in his care. He was very adamant about this and hoped this responsibility would lift him out of any hopelessness or dangerous reflection that Darnay thought he might fall into.              

 He wrote to Mr. Lorry and told him to take care of all of them. He also explained all his personal and business affairs. After that was done, he thanked him for his friendship and affection. Then he was done. He never thought about Mr. Carton. He was so focused on the others that he didnít even think of him once.              

 He had time to finish these letters before the lamps were all put out. When he lied down on his straw bed, he thought that his life was over.              

 But his life came back to him while he slept, and showed itself in happy memories. He saw himself free and happy back in the old house in Soho (though it had nothing in it that looked like the interior of the real house). He was completely free and lighthearted, with Lucie again. She told him it was all a dream and he had never left London. He slept without dreaming for a while, and then he dreamt he had been killed and had come back to her, dead and at peace, and yet he had not changed at all. He slept without dreaming again for a while, and he woke up in the morning. He didnít know where he was or what had happened, until it flashed in his mind, ìThis is the day I am going to die.î             

 This is how he spent the hours leading up to the day when fifty-two people were to have their heads cut off. He was calm now and hoped that he could face his death with quiet bravery. But a new idea came to him that made this very difficult to do.              

 He had never seen the guillotine before. He hadnít seen how high it was off the ground, how many steps it had, or where he would stand. He didnít know how the executioner would treat him or whether the executionerís hands would be stained with blood. He didnít know which way his face would be turned or whether he would be the first person or the last person to die that day. These and many similar questions forced their way into his mind over and over again. They werenít connected with any feelings of fear fear. He wasnít aware of being afraid at all. Instead, they came from wanting to know what to do when the time came. His worry was greatly out of proportion with the few quick moments that he would actually be there. It was like another spirit inside of him other than his own was wondering about this.             

 The hours passed as he paced back and forth, and the clocks struck numbers he would never hear again: nine gone forever, ten gone forever, eleven gone forever, and twelve was on its way. After struggling hard with this strange, disturbing thought, he got the better of it. He paced up and down, softly repeating his loved onesí names to himself. The worst of his suffering was over. He could walk up and down, free from distracting thoughts, praying for himself and for them.             

 Twelve oíclock came and was gone forever.              

 He had been told that three oíclock was the hour for the executions. He knew he would be brought out sometime before that, since the tumbrils of condemned prisoners moved through the streets very slowly. Therefore, he decided to think of two oíclock as the important hour, so he could strengthen himself in the meantime and after that time focus on strengthening others.              

 Walking back and forth with his arms folded on his chest, he was a very different man from the prisoner who had walked back and forth at La Force Prison. He heard the clock strike one without surprise. The hour had gone past like most other hours. He was thankful to Heaven that he had control of himself again. He thought, ìThere is just one more hour to go,î and he turned and continued walking back and forth again.              

 He heard footsteps in the stone passageway outside the door and stopped.          

 A key turned in the lock in the door. Before the door opened, or as it was being opened, a man said quietly in English, ìHe has never seen me here. I have kept out of his way. Go in alone. Iíll wait nearby. Donít waste any time!î             

 The door was quickly opened and closed, and Sydney Carton was standing in front of him, face-to-face. He was quiet and looking at him intently, smiling with his finger to his lips.              

 There was something so cheerful and unusual about his expression that at first Darnay thought he was imagining things. But then Carton spoke, and it was Cartonís real voice. He took Darnayís hand, and Darnay could feel his real grasp.              

 ìOf all the people on earth, am I the last person you expected to see?î he said.              

 ìI couldnít believe it was you. I can hardly believe it now.î Darnay was suddenly worried. ìYou arenít a prisoner, are you?î              

 ìNo. I happen to have some power over one of the guards here. Thatís why I am standing here in front of you. Your wife sent me, my dear Darnay.î             

 Darnay shook his hand.             

 ìI bring a request from her.î             

 ìWhat is it?î             

 ìItís a serious, urgent request. She sends it to you in the most pathetic tones of her voice that you love so much and remember so well.î             

 Darnay turned his face to the side.             

 ìThereís no time to ask me why I bring it or what it means. I donít have time to tell you. You must agree to it. Take off your boots and put on mine.î             

 Carton was as quick as lightning. There was a chair against the wall of the cell behind Darnay, and he had already moved forward and pushed Darnay into it. He stood over him, barefoot.              

 ìPut on my boots. Grab them and put them on. Quickly!î             

 ìCarton, there is no way to escape this place. It will never work. You will only be killed along with me. This is crazy.î             

 ìIt would be crazy if I asked you to escape. But do I? If I ask you to go out that door and try to escape, tell me itís crazy and stay here. Exchange cravats and coats with me. While you do it, let me take this ribbon out of your hair. Shake out your hair so it looks like mine!î             

 Very quickly and with a physical strength and a mental focus that seemed supernatural, Carton made him do all these things. Darnay was like a young child in his hands.              

 ìCarton! Dear Carton! Itís crazy. It canít be done. It will never work. People have tried to escape and have always failed. I beg you! Donít get yourself killed, too.î              

 ìDo I ask you, Darnay, to go out the door? When I ask that, you can refuse. Thereís a pen, ink, and paper on this table. Is your hand steady enough for you to write?î             

 ìIt was when you came in.î             

 ìSteady it again and write down what I say. Quickly, my friend!î             

 Darnay grabbed his head with his hand in confusion and sat down at the table. Carton had his right hand on his breast pocket. He stood close beside him.          

 ìWrite exactly what I say.î             

 ìTo whom should I address it?î             

 ìTo no one.î Carton still had his hand in his breast pocket.              

 ìShould I date it?î             

 ìNo.î             

 Darnay looked up when he asked each question. When he did, Carton looked down from where he was standing. He still had his hand in his breast pocket.              

 ìëIf you remember what we said to each other long ago, you will understand this when you read it,íî Carton dictated. ìëYou do remember it, I know. It is not in your nature to forget it.íî             

 He was pulling his hand out of his breast pocket. Darnay happened to look up quickly as he wrote. Cartonís hand stopped and grabbed hold of something.             

 ìHave you written ëforget ití yet?î asked Carton.             

 ìI have. Is that a weapon in your hand?î             

 ìNo. I am unarmed.î             

 ìWhatís in your hand?î             

 ìYou will know very soon. Keep writing. There are only a few words more.î He dictated again. ìëI am thankful that the time has come when I can prove them to be true. The fact that I am doing it shouldnít make you regret it or grieve.íî As he said these words, he looked at Darnay. His hand slowly and gently moved down close to Darnayís face.              

 Darnay dropped the pen onto the table and looked around him, dazed.              

 ìWhat is that vapor?î he asked.              

 ìVapor?î             

 ìDid I inhale something?î             

 ìIím not aware of anything. There canít be anything here. Pick up the pen and finish. Hurry, hurry!î             

 It was as if Darnayís memory were failing or his senses were dulled. He tried hard to stay focused. As he looked at Carton with blurred vision and shortened breath, Carton looked back at him steadily. His hand was in his breast pocket again.              

 ìHurry, hurry!î             

 Darnay bent over the paper again.             

 ìëIf it had been otherwiseóíî Cartonís hand was carefully moving toward Darnayís face again ìëóI never would have used the great opportunity.íî Cartonís hand was at Darnayís face again. ìëIf it had been otherwise, I would have had much more to lose. If it had been otherwiseóíî Carton looked at the pen and saw that his writing was trailing off into meaningless scribble.              

 Carton didnít move his hand back to his breast pocket anymore. Darnay jumped up with an accusing look, but Carton was holding his hand firmly up to his nostrils. Cartonís left arm caught him around the waist, and for a few seconds Darnay tried to fight with Carton, who had come to lay down his life for him. But within a minute or so, Darnay was stretched out on the ground, unconscious.          

 Quickly, but with sure hands and a sure heart, Carton dressed himself in the clothes Darnay had laid aside. He combed back his hair and tied it with the ribbon Darnay had been wearing. Then he called quietly, ìEnter there! Come in!î Barsad came in.             

 ìYou see?î said Carton, looking up. He kneeled on one knee beside the unconscious Darnay. He put the paper into his breast pocket. ìAre you in great danger of getting in trouble?î             

 ìMr. Carton,î answered Barsad, snapping his fingers timidly, ìthis business doesnít put me in danger if you stay true to your side of the deal.î             

 ìDonít be afraid of me. I will be true until my death.î             

 ìYou have to be, Mr. Carton, if fifty-two people are to die. If you go through with it dressed like that, I shall have nothing to fear.î             

 ìHave no fear! I will soon be dead and wonít be able to hurt you. Everyone else, God willing, will soon be far away. Now, get help and take me to the coach.î             

 ìYou?î asked Barsad, nervously.             

 ìHim, man, whom I have changed places with. Do you go out at the same gate you brought me in through?î             

 ìOf course.î             

 ìTell them I was weak and faint when you brought me in and I am fainter now that you are taking me out. Tell them my final conversation with Darnay was too much for me. Such a thing has happened here oftenótoo often. Your life is in your own hands. Quick! Call for help!î             

 ìYou swear not to betray me?î said Barsad, trembling as he paused for a moment.              

 ìMan, man!î answered Carton, stamping his foot. ìHavenít I already sworn a solemn vow to go through with this? Why are you wasting precious time now? Take him to the courtyard you know of and put him in the carriage yourself. Show him to Mr. Lorry and tell Mr. Lorry he only needs some fresh air to revive him. Tell him to remember what I said and the promise he made last night. Then tell him to drive away!î             

 Barsad left and Carton sat down at the table. He rested his forehead on his hands. Barsad returned immediately with two men.              

 ìWhat happened?î asked one of them, looking at the man who had fallen down. ìHeís troubled to find out that his friend is being sent to the guillotine?î             

 ìA good patriot could hardly have been more upset if this nobleman had been released.î             

 They picked up the unconscious man and put him on the stretcher they had brought to the door. They bent down to carry it away.              

 ìWeíre running out of time, Evremonde,î Barsad said to Carton in a warning voice.             

 ìI know,î answered Carton. ìPlease take care of my friend and leave me alone.î             

 ìCome on, boys,î said Barsad. ìLift him up and come this way.î             

 The door closed, and Carton was left alone. He strained to hear any sounds that might show that they were suspicious. There were none. He heard keys turning, doors slamming shut, and footsteps walking along hallways in the distance. He didnít hear anything unusual, like people yelling or rushing around. He breathed easier for a little while. He sat down at the table and listened again until the clock struck two.              

 Then he heard sounds, but he wasnít afraid of them because he knew what they meant. Several doors opened one after another, and finally his own door opened. A jailer with a list in his hand looked inside. All he said was, ìFollow me, Evremonde!î Carton followed him into a large, dark room that was far away. It was a dark winter day. The shadows inside and outside made it difficult to see the other people who were brought there to have their arms tied. Some were standing up and some were seated. A few of them were crying and some were moving around nervously. But most of them were silent and still, staring at the ground.          

 He stood by the wall in a dark corner while some of the fifty-two others were brought in after him. One man stopped to embrace him as he passed by as if he knew him. Carton felt terrified he would be found out, but the man continued on. A few moments later a young woman got up from where he had seen her sitting and came over to speak to him. She had a small, girlish figure, a beautiful pale face, and large, widely opened patient eyes.              

 ìCitizen Evremonde,î she said, touching him with her cold hand. ìI am a poor seamstress. I was with you in La Force Prison.î             

 He murmured, ìThatís right. I forgetówhat were you accused of?î             

 ìPlots. Though Heaven knows that I am innocent. Is it likely? Who would think of plotting with a poor, little weak creature like me?î             

 She smiled sadly when she said it, and he was so touched that he started to tear up.             

 ìI am not afraid to die, Citizen Evremonde. But I havenít done anything wrong. I am not unwilling to die if the Republic, which will do so much good for poor people like me, will benefit from my death. But I donít know how that can be, Citizen Evremonde. Iím such a poor, weak, little creature!î             

 He was moved by this poor girl, and she was the last thing on earth that would move him.              

 ìI heard you were released, Citizen Evremonde. I hoped it was true.î             

 ìIt was. But I was arrested again and condemned to die.î             

 ìIf I can ride in the same cart as you, Citizen Evremonde, will you let me hold your hand? Iím not afraid, but I am little and weak and it will give me more courage.î             

 As the girl looked up into his face, he saw that she suddenly doubted whether he was actually who he said. She looked astonished, and he kissed her young fingers, which were worn from years of poverty.              

 ìAre you dying for him?î she whispered.             

 ìAnd for his wife and child. Hush! Yes. I am dying for him.î             

 ìOh, will you let me hold your hand, brave stranger?î             

 ìHush! Yes, my dear. To the very end.î             

 ***             

 The same shadows that were falling on the prison were falling on the barrier at that same time in the early afternoon. There was a crowd around it, and a coach on its way out of Paris drove up to it to be questioned.              

 ìWho goes there?î said the guard. ìWhom do you have inside? Show us your papers!î             

 The people inside the coach handed the guard the papers and he read them.          

 ìAlexandre Manette. Doctor. French. Which one is he?î             

 They pointed out the confused old man. He was mumbling incoherently.              

 ìApparently the citizen doctor is not in his right mind? The Revolution fever was too much for him?î             

 It was far too much for him.              

 ìHa! Many people suffer from it,î said the guard. He read from the certificate: ìLucie. His daughter. French.î Which one is she?î he asked.              

 They pointed her out.              

 ìIt must be. Lucie. Sheís Evremondeís wife, isnít she?î             

 ìShe is,î they answered.             

 ìHa! Evremonde has a date elsewhere. Lucie, her child, English,î he read. ìThis is she?î             

 This is she.              

 ìKiss me, daughter of Evremonde,î the guard said to her. ìNow you have kissed a good Republican. Thatís something new to your family. Remember it! Sydney Carton. Lawyer. English,î the guard read. ìWhich one is he?î             

 He was lying in a corner of the carriage. They pointed him out too.              

 ìApparently the English lawyer has fainted?î             

 ìWe hope he will recover from the fresh air. He isnít well and is upset to be separated from a friend who has angered the Republic.î             

 ìIs that all? Thatís no big deal! Many have angered the Republic and must look out of the little windows of the prisons. Jarvis Lorry. Banker. English,î read the guard. ìWhich one is he?î             

 ìI am he, of course, since I am the only other person here.î             

 It was Jarvis Lorry who had answered all the previous questions. It was Jarvis Lorry who got out and stood with his hand on the coach door, answering the group of officials. The guards slowly walked around the carriage and climbed up on top to look at what little luggage there was on the roof. The country people were hanging around, pressing nearer to the coach doors and staring into it greedily. A small child in its motherís arms was reaching out so that it could touch the wife of an aristocrat who had been killed by the guillotine.              

 ìHere are your papers, Jarvis Lorry. They have been signed and approved.î             

 ìWe can leave, citizen?î             

 ìYou can leave. Move forward,   postilions a person riding one of the horses in a team drawing a carriage  postilions ! Have a good journey!î             

 ìThank you, citizens!...And we have passed the first threat.î             

 Again it was Jarvis Lorry who said these words. He clasped his hands together and looked up. People in the carriage were terrified and crying, and the unconscious traveler was breathing heavily.              

 ìArenít we going too slowly? Canít we make them go faster?î asked Lucie, clinging to her father.              

 ìIt would look like we were running away if we did. We canít make them go too fast. It would look suspicious.î             

 ìLook back and see if they are chasing us!î             

 ìThe road is empty, my dear. So far they are not chasing us.î             

 They passed houses in groups of twos and threes, lonely farms, ruins of buildings, dye works, tanneries, and such. They passed open fields and rows of leafless trees. The road was made of hard, uneven pavement, and there was soft, deep mud on either side. Sometimes they would drive into the mud to avoid the stones that clattered and shook the carriage. Sometimes they got stuck in trenches and marshes. This would make them so wildly impatient that they would want to get out and run or hideóanything but stop.              

 They left the open fields and were again surrounded by ruined buildings, farms, dye works, tanneries, and such. They saw more cottages in groups of twos and threes and more rows of leafless trees. ìHave these men tricked us?î they wondered. ìAre they taking us back to Paris by another road? Isnít this the same place that we have passed twice before? Thank Heaven, no. Thereís a village. Look back and see if they are following us! Hush. Thereís a posting house.î          

 Slowly the four horses were unharnessed. The coach stood casually in the little street without its horses, looking like it would never move again. Slowly the new horses came into view one by one, and slowly the new postilions followed them, sucking and weaving the lashes of their whips. Slowly the old postilions counted their money, add the numbers incorrectly, and become dissatisfied with their pay. All this time, the anxious hearts of the travelers were beating faster than the fastest horses that were ever born could gallop.             

 After a while the new postilions got into their saddles and the old ones were left behind. They went through the village, up and down a hill and onto the low, watery grounds. Suddenly, the postilions stopped speaking and started gesturing to each other wildly. The horses were pulled quickly to a stop. Were they being followed?             

 ìHo! You inside the carriage. Speak!î             

 ìWhat is it?î asked Mr. Lorry, looking out the window.              

 ìHow many did they say?î             

 ìI donít understand you.î             

 ìAt the last post. How many did they say were sent to the guillotine today?î             

 ìFifty-two.î             

 ìThatís what I said! A good number. My fellow citizen here said it was forty-two. There are ten more people than that who deserve to have their heads cut off today. The guillotine works well. I love it.î Then he yelled at the horses, ìForward! Whoop!î             

 The night turned dark, and the unconscious traveler started to move more. He was beginning to wake up and to speak understandably again. He thought he was still together with Mr. Carton. He called Carton by his name and asked him what he had in his hand. Oh, take pity on them, Heaven, and help them! Look out and see if they are being chased.             

 The wind is chasing them. The clouds are flying after them. The moon is falling and the night is chasing them. But so far, nothing else is chasing them.          

 While the fifty-two prisoners waited to be executed, Madame Defarge held a darkly ominous meeting with The Vengeance and Jacques Three of the Revolutionary jury. She didnít meet with them at the wine shop but in the shed of the wood sawyer, who used to be a repairer of roads. The wood sawyer himself did not take part in the meeting. He waited a little distance away, like an outsider who wasnít supposed to speak until he was needed or asked his opinion.             

 ìBut Monsieur Defarge is a good Republican without a doubt, isnít he?î asked Jacques Three.              

 ìThere isnít a better Republican in France,î the talkative Vengeance said in her shrill voice.              

 ìQuiet, Vengeance,î said Madame Defarge. She frowned and put her hand on The Vengeanceís lips. ìListen to me. My husband is a good Republican and a brave man. He deserves to be treated well by the Republic, and the government is confident in him. But my husband has his weaknesses. He is so weak that he will side with Dr. Manette.î             

 ìItís a great pity,î said Jacques Three hoarsely, shaking his head in doubt. His fingers were at his hungry mouth. ìHe is not acting like a good citizen. Itís unfortunate.î             

 ìLook,î said Madame Defarge. ìI donít care about this doctor at all. He can live or die as far as I care. It doesnít matter to me. But the Evremonde family has to die out, and the wife and child must die like their husband and father.î             

 ìShe has a good head for it,î answered Jacques Three hoarsely. ìI have seen someone with blue eyes and blond hair beheaded. The head looked beautiful when the executioner held it up.î He was such a monster that he spoke the way a gourmet talks about food.              

 Madame Defarge looked down and thought a little.             

 ìThe child also has blond hair and blue eyes,î said Jacques Three, thoughtfully enjoying his words. ìWe rarely have a child sent to the guillotine. Itís a pretty sight!î             

 ìIn a word,î said Madame Defarge, getting back onto the subject, ìI canít trust my husband about this. Since last night Iíve felt that I canít trust him with the details of my plans. I also feel that if I delay he could warn them, and then they might escape.î             

 ìThat must never happen,î said Jacques Three hoarsely. ìNo one must escape. We donít have enough people dying as it is. We should have a hundred and twenty people sent to the guillotine every day.î             

 ìIn a word,î Madame Defarge continued, ìmy husband doesnít have my reason for wanting to exterminate the Evremonde family, and I donít have his reason for having any affection for Dr. Manette. Therefore, I must act for myself. Come here, little citizen.î             

 The wood sawyer, who was deathly afraid of Madame Defarge, came forward clutching his red cap.              

 ìAbout those signals that she made to the prisoners, little citizen,î said Madame Defarge sternly. ìAre you ready to swear to them today?î             

 ìYes, yes. Why not?î cried the wood sawyer. ìEvery day, in any weather, from two to four oíclock, she was always signaling. Sometimes she came with her daughter; sometimes she did not. I know what I know. I saw it with my own eyes.î             

 He made all sorts of gestures as he spoke, as if he were imitating a few of the different signals that he had never actually seen Lucie make.              

 ìClearly they were forming plots,î said Jacques Three. ìIt couldnít be more clear!î             

 ìCan we be sure the jury will convict her?î asked Madame Defarge. She looked at him with a gloomy smile.              

 ìYou can count on the patriotic jury, citizeness. I speak for my fellow jurymen.î             

 ìNow, let me see,î said Madame Defarge, thinking it over again. ìLet me think it over just once more. Can I let this doctor live for my husbandís sake? I donít care either way. Can I spare him?î             

 ìHe would be one more head,î said Jacques Three quietly. ìWe really donít have enough heads as it is. It would be a pity to let him live, I think.î             

  ìHe was signaling to the prisoners with Lucie when I saw her,î argued Madame Defarge. ìI canít accuse one without accusing the other, and I canít keep quiet and put the whole case in this little citizenís hands,î she said, pointing to the wood sawyer. ìIím not a bad witness.î             

 The Vengeance and Jacques Three both tried to outdo each other in saying that she was the most admirable and marvelous witness. The little wood sawyer didnít want to be outdone and called her a celestial witness.             

 ìHe must take his chances,î said Madame Defarge. ìNo, I cannot spare him. You are busy at three oíclock. You are going to see the people who are to be executed today. You?î             

 She asked this to the wood sawyer. He hurriedly said yes and took this opportunity to say that he was a passionate Republican and that he would be the saddest of Republicans if anything stopped him from enjoying the pleasure of smoking his afternoon pipe while watching people killed at the guillotine. He was so passionate about it that he might have been suspected of fearing for his own personal safety at all times, and perhaps Madame Defarge did suspect him as she looked at him angrily with her dark eyes.             

 ìI will be doing the same thing there,î said madame. ìAfter itís overóletís say at eight oíclock tonightócome to see me in Saint Antoine and we will go accuse these people at my Section.î             

 The wood sawyer said he would be proud and flattered to go with Madame Defarge. Madame Defarge looked at him, and he became embarrassed. He avoided her look as if he were a small dog and hid his confusion by returning to sawing wood.              

 Madame Defarge beckoned to Jacques Three and The Vengeance to come closer to the door, and then she elaborated on her thoughts:             

 ìShe will be at home now, waiting for him to be executed, mourning and grieving. She will want to accuse the Republic of injustice, and she will be sympathetic with the enemies of the Republic. I will go see her.î             

 ìYou are an admirable woman! I adore you!î yelled Jacques Three enthusiastically. ìAh, my cherished!î cried The Vengeance, embracing her.          

 ìTake my knitting,î said Madame Defarge, giving it to The Vengeance. ìHave it waiting for me at my usual seat near the guillotine. Save my usual chair for me. Go right now, for there will probably me a bigger crowd than usual there today.î             

 ìI will follow my chiefís orders,î said The Vengeance eagerly. She kissed Madame Defarge on the cheek. ìYou wonít be late?î             

 ìIíll be there before they begin.î             

 ìAnd before the tumbrils arrive with the prisoners. Make sure that you are there before the tumbrils arrive!î The Vengeance called after her, but Madame Defarge had already stepped out into the street.             

 Madame Defarge slightly waved her hand to show that she had heard her and could be counted on to arrive on time. Then she walked through the mud and around the corner of the prison wall. The Vengeance and Jacques Three watched her as she walked away, admiring her for her beauty and her high morals.             

 There were many women who had been badly disfigured by the violent atmosphere of the time, but there was no one among them more terrifying than Madame Defarge, who was now walking through the streets. She had a strong and fearless character and was smart and always prepared. She was determined and had the kind of beauty that not only seems to impart strength and ferocity but also makes others recognize those qualities in her instinctually. The troubled times would have raised her up under any circumstances, but her childhood had also given her a sense of injustice and a hatred of the upper class. These conditions had turned her into a tigress, and she was completely pitiless. If she had ever had any pity in her, it was gone.              

 She didnít care that an innocent man was about to die for the sins of his ancestors. She saw them, not him. She didnít care that his wife was about to become a widow and his daughter an orphan. That wasnít enough punishment, because they were her natural enemies and prey, and so they had no right to live. It was useless to appeal to her, since she had no pity, even for herself. If she had been struck down in the streets in one of the many battles she had been involved in, she wouldnít have pitied herself. If she were sent to the guillotine to die tomorrow, she wouldnít feel anything but a strong desire to see the person who sent her there killed instead.              

 That was the heart Madame Defarge had under her rough robe. She wore her robe carelessly. It was an attractive robe in a strange way. Her dark hair looked thick under her rough red cap. A loaded pistol hid in her shirt, and a sharp dagger was hidden at her waist. Dressed like this, she walked confidently, like a woman who had often walked barefoot and barelegged along brown, sandy beaches as a young girl. Madame Defarge made her way through the streets.              

 At that very moment the traveling coach was waiting for the rest of its passengers. When the journey had been planned out the night before, Mr. Lorry had worried about what to do with Miss Pross. It wasnít only that they didnít want to overload the coach, but it was also very important that they kept the time required for the guards to examine all the passengers as short as possible, since their escape might depend on saving a few seconds here or there. After thinking it over anxiously, he finally suggested that Miss Pross and Jerry, who were free to leave the city at any time, should leave at three oíclock in the fastest possible vehicle. They were unburdened by luggage and would overtake the coach soon. Then they would pass it and go ahead of it on the road. This would speed up their progress during the night when they were most worried about being delayed.              

 Miss Pross was very pleased with this plan, as it offered a way to help them during their emergency. She and Jerry had seen the coach leave. They knew that her brother, Solomon, had helped Darnay into the coach disguised as Carton. They had spent about ten minutes in torturous suspense and were now finishing their arrangements to follow the coach as Madame Defarge made her way through the streets. Madame Defarge got closer and closer to the otherwise deserted house where they were meeting.              

 ìWhat do you think, Mr. Cruncher?î said Miss Pross. She was so nervous that she could hardly speak, or stand, or move, or live. ìWhat do you think about leaving from another courtyard? Another carriage has already left from here today. It might look suspicious.î             

 ìI think youíre right, miss,î answered Mr. Cruncher. ìEither way, Iíll do what you want, right or wrong.î             

 ìI am so troubled with fear and hope for our friends that I am unable to form a plan,î said Miss Pross, crying wildly. ìAre you able to form any plan, Mr. Cruncher?î             

 ìI hope I will be able to in the future,î answered Mr. Cruncher. ìRight now, Iím not able to think of anything. Would you do me a favor, miss, and listen to two promises and vows that I want to have on record here in this crisis?î             

 ìOh, for gracious sake!î cried Miss Pross, still crying wildly. ìSay them quickly and get them out of the way, like a good man.î             

 ìFirst,î said Mr. Cruncher, trembling and looking pale and serious. ìIf our poor friends get away, I wonít do it anymore! Never again!î             

 ìIím quite sure that you will never do it again, Mr. Cruncher, whatever it is. Please donít think you need to tell me what youíre talking about.î             

 ìNo, miss,î answered Jerry. ìI wonít tell you what it is. Second, if our poor friends get away, I wonít ever interfere with Mrs. Cruncherís praying. Never again!î             

 ìWhatever situation you have at home,î said Miss Pross, trying to dry her eyes and compose herself, ìI know itís best that Mrs. Cruncher is able to do what she wants. Oh, my poor friends!î             

 ìRemember what Iím telling you and tell Mrs. Cruncher yourself,î continued Mr. Cruncher, speaking as though he were preaching at a church pulpit. ìIíd go so far as to say that my opinions about praying have changed. I only hope with all my heart that Mrs. Cruncher is praying right now.î             

 ìThere, there! I hope she is, my dear man,î cried Miss Pross. ìAnd I hope that her prayers are answered.î             

 ìGod forbid that anything I have ever said or done wrong would ever hurt our poor friends,î continued Mr. Cruncher, even more seriously and more slowly. ìIf itís possible, we should both pray to get our friends out of this risky situation! God forbid, miss. Thatís what I say. Forbid it!î Mr. Cruncher tried to find a good ending to his speech, but this was the best he could do.              

 Meanwhile, Madame Defarge was still making her way through the streets and getting closer and closer.              

 ìIf we ever get back to England,î said Miss Pross, ìyou can rely on my telling Mrs. Cruncher as much as I can remember and understand of what you have so impressively said. You can be sure that I will swear that you were completely serious about it at the time. Now, please, letís think of a plan! My good Mr. Cruncher, letís think!î             

 Madame Defarge was still making her way through the streets and getting closer and closer.              

 ìWouldnít it be best if you went on ahead, stopped the horses and carriage from coming here, and then waited for me somewhere else?î asked Miss Pross.             

 Mr. Cruncher thought that was best.              

 ìWhere could you wait for me?î asked Miss Pross.             

 Mr. Cruncher was so confused that the only place he could think of was Temple Bar. Unfortunately Temple Bar was hundreds of miles away, and Madame Defarge was getting very close.              

 ìThe door of Notre Dame cathedral,î said Miss Pross. ìWould it be too much out of your way to meet me near the big cathedral door between the two towers?î             

 ìNo, miss,î answered Mr. Cruncher.              

 ìThen go to the posting house right away, like a good man, and change our arrangements,î said Miss Pross.             

 ìI am worried about leaving you. We donít know what could happen,î said Mr. Cruncher, hesitating and shaking his head.              

 ìHeaven knows we donít,î answered Miss Pross. ìBut donít worry about me. Pick me up at the cathedral at three oíclock or as close to three as you can. Iím sure that that will be better than leaving from here. Iím certain of it. There! Bless you, Mr. Cruncher! Donít worry about me! Worry about the lives of the people who depend on us!î             

 Miss Prossís grabbed his hands and begged him. This, along with her convincing argument, convinced Mr. Cruncher. He nodded encouragingly once or twice and immediately went out to change their arrangements. He left her by herself to follow later as she had suggested.              

 Miss Pross was relieved to have come up with a precaution that was already being put into action. She needed to dress herself in a way that wouldnít draw attention in the streets. This activity was another relief to her. She looked at her watch. It was twenty minutes past two. She couldnít waste any time. She had to get ready at once.              

 She was distressed and afraid to be alone in the empty rooms. She kept thinking she saw faces peeking out from behind every open door. Miss Pross got a basin of cold water and splashed water on her eyes, which were swollen and red from crying. She was so bothered by her fears that she couldnít bear to have her sight obstructed by the dripping water for even a minute. She kept pausing and looking around to make sure no one was watching her. In one of those pauses, she drew back and screamed, for she saw someone standing in the room.             

 The basin fell and broke on the ground, and the water flowed to the feet of Madame Defarge. Many strange circumstances and much spilling of blood had brought her feet there.              

 Madame Defarge looked at her coldly and said, ìWhere is Evremondeís wife?î             

 It occurred to Miss Pross that all the doors were open and it would show that they had all fled the city. The first thing she did was close them, and then she moved in front of the door of Lucieís room.              

 Madame Defarge watched her with her dark eyes as she moved quickly around the room and stared at her after she was finished. There was nothing beautiful about Miss Prossóage had not made her appearance less wild or less grimóbut Miss Pross was a determined woman in her own way. She looked Madame Defarge up and down.          

 ìYou look like you could be the devilís wife,î said Miss Pross, breathing heavily. ìEven so, you wonít get the better of me. I am an Englishwoman.î             

 Madame Defarge looked at her with contempt, but she understood along with Miss Pross that they were challenging one another. Madame Defarge saw a tight, hard, wiry woman in front of her. She noticed the same things that Mr. Lorry had noticed about her many years ago. She knew very well that Miss Pross was a devoted friend to the Manette family, and Miss Pross knew very well that Madame Defarge was an enemy of the Manette family.              

 ìIím on my way to the execution,î said Madame Defarge, gesturing slightly with her hand in the direction of the guillotine. ìThey save my seat for me and have my knitting ready for me there. Iíve come to give my compliments to Lucie on my way. I want to see her.î             

 ìI know that your intentions are evil,î said Miss Pross. ìYou can trust that I will hold my own in fighting against them.î             

 Miss Pross spoke English and Madame Defarge spoke French, and neither understood the other. Both were watching each other carefully and trying to guess from the otherís behavior what they were saying.              

 ìIt wonít help Lucie to hide from me right now,î said Madame Defarge. ìGood patriots will know what it means if she does. Let me see her. Go tell her that I want to see her. Do you hear me?î             

 ìIf your eyes were   bed winches a machine for lifting loads made of a rope or chain wound around a cylinder  bed winches  and I was an English four-poster bed, they wouldnít get a splinter out of me. No, you wicked, foreign woman. I am your match.î             

 Madame Defarge didnít follow these remarks very closely, but she understood them enough to know that Miss Pross wasnít going to go get Lucie.              

 ìYou stupid pig!î said Madame Defarge, frowning. ìYouíre not answering me. I demand to see her. Either tell her that I demand to see her or get out of the way of the door and let me go see her myself!î She waved her right arm angrily as she said this.              

 ìI never thought that I would ever want to understand your ridiculous language, but I would give all I have, besides the clothes Iím wearing now, to know whether you suspect the truth, or any part of it.î             

 Neither one of them would stop staring into the otherís eyes for a single moment. Madame Defarge hadnít moved from where she stood when Miss Pross first realized she was there, but now she moved forward one step.              

 ìI am British,î said Miss Pross. ìI am desperate, and I donít care two pennies for myself. I know that the longer I keep you here, the greater the hope is for Lucie. I will tear all of your dark hair clean off your head if you lay a finger on me!î             

 As Miss Pross spoke, she shook her head, glaring at Madame Defarge and taking a breath between every quick sentence. Miss Pross had threatened her, though she had never hit anyone in her life.              

 Her courage made her so emotional that it brought tears into her eyes. Madame Defarge misunderstood this as weakness. ìHa, ha!î she laughed. ìYou pitiful, worthless woman. Iíll speak to Dr. Manette.î Then she raised her voice and called out, ìCitizen doctor! Wife of Evremonde! Child of Evremonde! Anyone here but this miserable fool Iím talking to, answer me!î             

 Maybe it was the silence that followed, or the expression on Miss Prossís face, or a sudden worry that had nothing to do with either, but something made Madame Defarge think that they might all be gone. She opened three of the doors quickly and looked into the other rooms.              

 ìThose rooms are all a mess. Someone has been packing quickly, and there are odds and ends on the ground. There is no one in that room behind you, is there? Let me look.î             

 ìNever!î said Miss Pross, who understood the request as perfectly as Madame Defarge understood the answer.              

 ìIf they arenít in that room, then they are gone. They can be chased and brought back,î Madame Defarge thought.              

 ìAs long as you donít learn whether they are in that room or not, you wonít know what to do,î Miss Pross thought. ìAnd you wonít learn that if I can help it. Whether you know that or not, you will stay here as long as I can keep you here.î             

 ìI have been fighting in the streets since the beginning of the Revolution, and nothing has stopped me. I will tear you to pieces if I have to, but I will move you away from that door,î said Madame Defarge.              

 ìWe are alone at the top of a tall house in an empty courtyard. No one is likely to hear us. I pray for the physical strength to keep you here. Every minute you are here is worth a hundred thousand guineas to my darling Lucie,î said Miss Pross.              

 Madame Defarge moved toward the door. Miss Pross instinctively grabbed her around the waist with both arms and held onto her tightly. It was pointless for Madame Defarge to struggle and hit at her. Miss Pross held on to her tightly with the strength of love, which is always much stronger than hate. She even lifted her up off the floor while they struggled, and Madame Defarge beat and tore at Miss Prossís face with her hands. Miss Pross kept her head down and held her around her waist, clinging to her with the force of a drowning woman.          

 Soon, Madame Defarge stopped hitting Miss Pross and reached for the knife hidden at her waist. ìYour knife is under my arm,î said Miss Pross. Her voice was stifled as they struggled. ìYou wonít draw it. Iím stronger than you, thank Heaven. Iíll hold you until one or the other of us faints or dies!î             

 Madame Defargeís hands reached for her bosom. Miss Pross looked up and saw that she had grabbed her pistol. She struck at it, and there was a flash and a crash. Miss Pross stood there alone, blinded by smoke.              

 All of this happened in a second, and there was an awful stillness as the smoke cleared. The smoke moved through the air like the soul of Madame Defarge, whose body lied lifeless on the ground.              

 At first, Miss Pross was frightened and horrified, and she moved as far away from the body as she could. She ran downstairs to call for help, even though it was useless. Fortunately, she thought about the consequences of what she had done in time to stop herself and go back upstairs. It was awful for her to go in the room again, but she went back inside. She even went near the body to get the bonnet and other things that she needed to wear. She went out into the staircase and got dressed, but first she locked the door and took the key. She sat down on the stairs for a few moments to catch her breath and cry, and then she got up and hurried away.              

 Luckily she had a veil on her bonnet. Otherwise she wouldnít have been able to go through the streets without being stopped. Luckily, too, she always looked so strange that the dishevelment on her wasnít as obvious as it would have been on any other woman. She needed both of these advantages, for there were deep marks on her face from Madame Defargeís gripping fingers. Her hair was torn, and her dress, which she had quickly adjusted with her trembling hands, had been pulled and tugged a hundred different ways.              

 She dropped the key to the front door in the river as she crossed the bridge and arrived at the cathedral a few minutes before Jerry. While she was waiting, she thought, ìWhat if the key had already been caught in a net and identified? What if they opened the door and discovered Madame Defargeís body? What if I am stopped at the gate, sent to prison, and charged with murder?î While she was thinking these thoughts, Jerry appeared. He took her into the carriage and took her away.              

 ìIs there any noise in the streets?î she asked him.             

 ìThe usual noises,î answered Mr. Cruncher. He was surprised by the question and surprised by the way she looked.              

 ìI didnít hear you,î said Miss Pross. ìWhat did you say?î             

 It was pointless for Mr. Cruncher to repeat what he had said. Miss Pross couldnít hear him. ìIíll nod my head,î thought Mr. Cruncher, amazed. ìSheíll see that no matter what.î And she did.             

 ìIs there any noise in the streets now?î asked Miss Pross again.              

 Mr. Cruncher nodded his head again.             

 ìI donít hear it.î             

 ìHas she gone deaf in the last hour?î Mr. Cruncher asked himself, thinking it over, disturbed. ìWhatís happened to her?î             

 ìI feel as if there was a flash and a crash, and that crash was the last thing Iíll ever hear in my life,î said Miss Pross.              

 ìSheís is a strange state,î said Mr. Cruncher, becoming more and more disturbed. ìHas she been taking something to keep her courage up? Listen! Thereís the roll of those dreadful carts! You can hear that, canít you, miss?î             

 ìI canít hear anything,î said Miss Pross, seeing that he was speaking to her. ìOh, my good man. First there was a loud crash and then silence. That silence seems to be permanent and constant. It will never be broken as long as I live.î             

 ìIf she canít hear the rolling of those dreadful carts, which are now very close to their journeyís end,î said Mr. Cruncher, looking over his shoulder, ìI think that she will never hear anything else in this world.î             

 And indeed she never did.              

 The empty death carts rumble harshly along the streets of Paris. Six carts carry the prisoners who are to be executed that day to the guillotine. The guillotine is like all of the devouring, ravenous monsters that have ever been imagined, combined into one. And yet even in France, with its rich soil and good weather, there isnít a blade of grass, a leaf, a root, a sprig, or a single peppercorn that will grow to maturity more predictably than the Revolution did. If people are beaten down again like this, the same horrible thing will happen. If greed and oppression are allowed to grow again, it will produce a similar result.              

 Six carts roll along the streets. Time, you powerful magician! Change these back to the innocent farm carts that they used to be and you would see that they were the carriages of ruling monarchs and feudal nobles, the dressing rooms of prostitutes, the churches that are not houses of God but dens of thieves, the huts of millions of starving peasants. No, the great magician who does Godís work never reverses what he has changed. ìIf you were changed into this shape by God,î say the seers to the enchanted in the wise Arabian stories, ìthen you must stay that way! But if youíve been changed by mere magic, then return to your former shape!î The tumbrils will not change back to what they were. They continue to roll along the streets.              

 As the somber wheels of the six carts roll along, they clear a long, crooked path through the crowds in the streets. People move to either side, and the tumbrils move forward steadily. The people living in the houses nearby are so used to the tumbrils coming through that many of them donít even look out their windows. Other people donít even pause in their work as they look at the people in the tumbrils. Some houses have visitors that have come to see the tumbrils go by. Their host points his finger at one cart after another like the curator of a museum, and explains to them who was carted to the guillotine yesterday and two days before.              

 Some of the people riding in the tumbrils look at these things, and look at everything else, with a blank stare. Others look on with a lingering interest in the ways of life. Some are seated with their heads down and sunk into silent despair. Some are so aware of their appearance that they look out at the crowds with looks they have seen in plays or in paintings. Several close their eyes and try to gather their thoughts together. Only one miserable creature looks crazed. He is so distraught and horrified that he sings and tries to dance. None of them tries to appeal by their looks or their gestures to the pity of the people in the crowd.              

 There is a group of horsemen riding alongside the tumbrils. People in the crowd often look up at them and ask them questions. It always seems to be the same question, for after the question is asked, people rush over to the third cart. The horsemen beside that cart often point out one man in it with their swords. Everyone wants to know who he is. He is standing at the back of the tumbril with his head down, talking to a peasant girl who sits next to him in the cart and holds his hand. He doesnít care about whatís happening around him and always talks to the girl. People all along St. Honore Street yell at him. He only smiles quietly, if he reacts at all, and shakes his hair a little more loosely over his face. His arms are tied, so he canít touch his face.              

 Barsad and the other prison spies wait for the tumbrils on the steps of the church. He looks into the first tumbril, but heís not there. He looks into the second one too, but heís not there. Heís already wondering, ìHas he betrayed me?î Then he looks into the third tumbril and feels relieved as he sees him.             

 ìWhich one is Evremonde?î asks a man behind him.              

 ìThat one. At the back there.î             

 ìHolding the girlís hand?î             

 ìYes.î             

 The man yells, ìDown with Evremonde! Send all aristocrats to the guillotine! Down with Evremonde!î             

 ìHush, hush!î Barsad says to him timidly.             

 ìAnd why not, citizen?î             

 ìHeís going to pay for his crimes. He will be dead in five minutes. Leave him alone.î             

 But the man continues to yell, ìDown with Evremonde!î Carton, pretending to be Evremonde, turns toward the man for a moment. Then Carton sees Barsad. He looks at him carefully, and goes his way.              

 The clocks are striking three. The carts are pushing through the crowd the other way and arriving at the place where people are executed. The people who have moved out of the way of the carts on either side now crowd in behind the last cart as it moves on, for they are all following to the guillotine. In front of it, a number of women sit in chairs as if they were in a public garden. They are busy knitting. The Vengeance is standing on one of the chairs in the front looking around for Madame Defarge.              

 ìTherese!î she yells in her shrill voice. ìHas anyone seen her? Therese Defarge!î             

 ìSheís never missed an execution before,î says another of the knitting women.             

 ìNo, and she wonít miss it now,î yells The Vengeance sullenly.             

 ìYell louder,î suggests the other woman.             

 Yes! Yell louder, Vengeance. Yell much louder and she wonít come. Yell even louder, Vengeance, and yell a little oath with it, and she still wonít come. Send other women all over to look for her. And yet, even though the people you send have done terrible things, itís doubtful they will be willing to die to find her!             

 ìWhat bad luck!î yells The Vengeance, stomping her foot on the chair. ìAnd here are the tumbrils! And Evremonde will be killed in just a moment. And sheís not here! See! Her knitting is in my hand and her empty chair is ready for her. Iím so angry and disappointed I will cry!î             

 As The Vengeance gets down off of her chair to cry, the tumbrils begin to unload the prisoners. The executioners at the guillotine are dressed and ready. There is a crash. Someoneís head is cut off and held up to the crowd. The knitting women, who hardly looked at the head a moment ago when it was alive, count ìone.î             

 The second tumbril empties and moves on. The third comes up. There is a crash. The knitting women, who never stop knitting, count ìtwo.î             

 The man who is supposedly Evremonde climbs down from the tumbril. The seamstress is lifted out after him. He doesnít let go of her hand as he gets out, but is still holding it as he promised. He gently places her with her back to the guillotine. The blade is constantly whirring up to the top and then falling down again. She looks into his face and thanks him.              

 ìIf not for you, dear stranger, I wouldnít be so calm. I am a poor little thing and am weak. Nor would I have been able to turn my thoughts to Him who died so that we could have hope and comfort here today. I think you were sent to me by Heaven.î             

 ìOr you to me,î says Sydney Carton. ìKeep looking at me, dear child, and donít worry about anything else.î             

 ìI donít worry about anything while I hold your hand. I wonít worry about anything when I let it go either, if they kill me quickly.î             

 ìThey will be quick. Donít be afraid!î             

 The two of them stand in the quickly shrinking group of victims. But they are speaking as if they are alone. Their looks, their voices, their hands, and their hearts are connected. These two children of the earth, the Universal Mother, who are otherwise so different, have come together on the way to their deaths, to rest in her bosom.              

 ìMy brave, generous friend. Will you let me ask you one last question? I donít understand something, and it bothers me a little.î             

 ìWhat is it?î             

 ìI have a cousin. She is my only relative. She is an orphan, like me, and I love her very much. She is five years younger than I am, and she lives in a farmhouse in the south country. We had to leave each other because we were so poor. She doesnít know that I am about to die because I donít know how to write and couldnít send her a letter. Even if I could, how would I tell her? Itís better that she doesnít know.î             

 ìYes, yes. Itís better that she doesnít know.î             

 ìWhat Iíve been thinking as we rolled along, and what Iím still thinking now, as I look into your kind, strong face that gives me so much support, is this: If the Republic really does help the poor, and they become less hungry and suffer less, she may live a long time. She may even live to be an old woman.î             

 ìWhat then, my gentle sister?î             

 ìDo you think that it will seem like a long time to me while I wait for her in Heaven, where I am sure you and I will both go when we die?î As she speaks her uncomplaining eyes fill with tears, and her lips tremble.             

 ìIt wonít seem long, my dear child. There is no time in Heaven, and no troubles there.î             

 ìYou are so comforting to me! I am so ignorant. Should I kiss you now? Is it time?î             

 ìYes.î             

 She kisses his lips, and he kisses hers. They bless each other. Her hand isnít trembling when he lets go of it, and the expression on her face is sweet, bright, and strong. She goes to the guillotine before him, and is gone. The knitting women count ìtwenty-two.î             

 ìI am the resurrection and the life, says the Lord,î Carton thought. ìHe that believes in me, even though he is dead, will live. Whoever lives and believes in me will never die.î             

 Carton hears the murmuring of many voices in the crowd. He sees many faces turned up toward him and looking at him. He sees people on the outside of the crowd push in so that the whole crowd moves forward like a wave. Then there is a flash and it all goes away. Twenty-three.              

 ***             

 It was said in Paris that night that Carton had the most peaceful look on his face that anyone had ever seen on someone sent to the guillotine. Many people added that he looked almost heavenly, and like a prophet.              

 One of the most remarkable people who died that same day at the guillotine was a woman who had asked at the foot of that same scaffold earlier if she could write down what she was thinking. If Carton had said what he had been thinking, and if he had been able to see into the future, he would have said this:             

 ìI see Barsad, Cly, Defarge, The Vengeance, Jacques Three the juryman, the judge, the many new tyrants that have taken over after destroying the old, all dying at the guillotine, before it stops being used. I see the beautiful city of Paris and the wonderful people of France rising up from this abyss, In their struggles to be truly free, in their triumphs and defeats for many years to come, I see the evil of this time, and the evil of the time before that caused the Revolution, gradually making amends for itself and dying out.              

 ìI see the people for which I died living peaceful, useful, successful, and happy lives back in the England I will never see again. I see Lucie with a child on her breast who is named after me. I see Dr. Manette, who is old and bent over but otherwise healthy again. He is treating patients and is at peace. I see Mr. Lorry, who has been their friend for so long, enriching their lives for ten years, and dying tranquilly.              

 ìI see that I hold a special place in their hearts and in the hearts of future generations of their family. I see Lucie as an old woman, crying for me on the anniversary of the day I died. I see her and Charles dying and lying next to each other in their graves. I know that they honored me in their souls as much as they honored each other.              

 ìI see that child who lay on Lucieís breast and who was named after me becoming a man and succeeding as a lawyer. I see him being so successful that he brings honor to my name by his actions. I see the damage I had done to my name through my bad behavior fade away. I see him, the best of just judges and honored men, having a boy and naming it after me. The boy has a wrinkled forehead and blond hair like Lucieís. I see him bringing the boy here, which by then is a beautiful place without a trace of the guillotine to be seen. I hear him tell the child my story tenderly and emotionally.              

 ìIt is a far, far better thing that I do than I have ever done. It is a far, far better rest that I go to than I have ever known.î             