It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom,it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch ofincredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it wasthe spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us,we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all goingdirect the other wayóin short, the period was so far like the present period,that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for goodor for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only.            

There were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a plain face, on thethrone of England; there were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a fairface, on the throne of France. In both countries it was clearer than crystal tothe lords of the State preserves of loaves and fishes, that things in generalwere settled for ever.            

It was the year of Our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five.Spiritual revelations were conceded to England at that favoured period, as atthis. Mrs. Southcott had recently attained her five-and-twentieth blessedbirthday, of whom a prophetic private in the Life Guards had heralded thesublime appearance by announcing that arrangements were made for the swallowingup of London and Westminster. Even the Cock-lane ghost had been laid only around dozen of years, after rapping out its messages, as the spirits of thisvery year last past (supernaturally deficient in originality) rapped out theirs.Mere messages in the earthly order of events had lately come to the EnglishCrown and People, from a congress of British subjects in America: which, strangeto relate, have proved more important to the human race than any communicationsyet received through any of the chickens of the Cock-lane brood.            

France, less favoured on the whole as to matters spiritual than her sister ofthe shield and trident, rolled with exceeding smoothness down hill, making papermoney and spending it. Under the guidance of her Christian pastors, sheentertained herself, besides, with such humane achievements as sentencing ayouth to have his hands cut off, his tongue torn out with pincers, and his bodyburned alive, because he had not kneeled down in the rain to do honour to adirty procession of monks which passed within his view, at a distance of somefifty or sixty yards. It is likely enough that, rooted in the woods of Franceand Norway, there were growing trees, when that sufferer was put to death,already marked by the Woodman, Fate, to come down and be sawn into boards, tomake a certain movable framework with a sack and a knife in it, terrible inhistory. It is likely enough that in the rough outhouses of some tillers of theheavy lands adjacent to Paris, there were sheltered from the weather that veryday, rude carts, bespattered with rustic mire, snuffed about by pigs, androosted in by poultry, which the Farmer, Death, had already set apart to be histumbrils of the Revolution. But that Woodman and that Farmer, though they workunceasingly, work silently, and no one heard them as they went about withmuffled tread: the rather, forasmuch as to entertain any suspicion that theywere awake, was to be atheistical and traitorous.            

In England, there was scarcely an amount of order and protection to justifymuch national boasting. Daring burglaries by armed men, and highway robberies,took place in the capital itself every night; families were publicly cautionednot to go out of town without removing their furniture to upholsterers'warehouses for security; the highwayman in the dark was a City tradesman in thelight, and, being recognised and challenged by his fellow-tradesman whom hestopped in his character of "the Captain," gallantly shot him through the headand rode away; the mail was waylaid by seven robbers, and the guard shot threedead, and then got shot dead himself by the other four, "in consequence of thefailure of his ammunition:" after which the mail was robbed in peace; thatmagnificent potentate, the Lord Mayor of London, was made to stand and deliveron Turnham Green, by one highwayman, who despoiled the illustrious creature insight of all his retinue; prisoners in London gaols fought battles with theirturnkeys, and the majesty of the law fired blunderbusses in among them, loadedwith rounds of shot and ball; thieves snipped off diamond crosses from the necksof noble lords at Court drawing-rooms; musketeers went into St. Giles's, tosearch for contraband goods, and the mob fired on the musketeers, and themusketeers fired on the mob, and nobody thought any of these occurrences muchout of the common way. In the midst of them, the hangman, ever busy and everworse than useless, was in constant requisition; now, stringing up long rows ofmiscellaneous criminals; now, hanging a housebreaker on Saturday who had beentaken on Tuesday; now, burning people in the hand at Newgate by the dozen, andnow burning pamphlets at the door of Westminster Hall; to-day, taking the lifeof an atrocious murderer, and to-morrow of a wretched pilferer who had robbed afarmer's boy of sixpence.            

All these things, and a thousand like them, came to pass in and close upon thedear old year one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five. Environed by them,while the Woodman and the Farmer worked unheeded, those two of the large jaws,and those other two of the plain and the fair faces, trod with stir enough, andcarried their divine rights with a high hand. Thus did the year one thousandseven hundred and seventy-five conduct their Greatnesses, and myriads of smallcreaturesóthe creatures of this chronicle among the restóalong the roads thatlay before them.             

It was the Dover road that lay, on a Friday night late in November, before thefirst of the persons with whom this history has business. The Dover road lay, asto him, beyond the Dover mail, as it lumbered up Shooterís Hill. He walked uphill in the mire by the side of the mail, as the rest of the passengers did; notbecause they had the least relish for walking exercise, under the circumstances,but because the hill, and the harness, and the mud, and the mail, were all soheavy, that the horses had three times already come to a stop, besides oncedrawing the coach across the road, with the mutinous intent of taking it back toBlackheath. Reins and whip and coachman and guard, however, in combination, hadread that article of war which forbade a purpose otherwise strongly in favour ofthe argument, that some brute animals are endued with Reason; and the team hadcapitulated and returned to their duty.            

With drooping heads and tremulous tails, they mashed their way through thethick mud, floundering and stumbling between whiles, as if they were falling topieces at the larger joints. As often as the driver rested them and brought themto a stand, with a wary ìWo-ho! so-ho-then!î the near leader violently shook hishead and everything upon itólike an unusually emphatic horse, denying that thecoach could be got up the hill. Whenever the leader made this rattle, thepassenger started, as a nervous passenger might, and was disturbed inmind.            

There was a steaming mist in all the hollows, and it had roamed in itsforlornness up the hill, like an evil spirit, seeking rest and finding none. Aclammy and intensely cold mist, it made its slow way through the air in ripplesthat visibly followed and overspread one another, as the waves of an unwholesomesea might do. It was dense enough to shut out everything from the light of thecoach-lamps but these its own workings, and a few yards of road; and the reek ofthe labouring horses steamed into it, as if they had made it all.            

Two other passengers, besides the one, were plodding up the hill by the sideof the mail. All three were wrapped to the cheekbones and over the ears, andwore jack-boots. Not one of the three could have said, from anything he saw,what either of the other two was like; and each was hidden under almost as manywrappers from the eyes of the mind, as from the eyes of the body, of his twocompanions. In those days, travellers were very shy of being confidential on ashort notice, for anybody on the road might be a robber or in league withrobbers. As to the latter, when every posting-house and ale-house could producesomebody in ìthe Captainësî pay, ranging from the landlord to the lowest stablenon-descript, it was the likeliest thing upon the cards. So the guard of theDover mail thought to himself, that Friday night in November, one thousand sevenhundred and seventy-five, lumbering up Shooterís Hill, as he stood on his ownparticular perch behind the mail, beating his feet, and keeping an eye and ahand on the arm-chest before him, where a loaded blunderbuss lay at the top ofsix or eight loaded horse-pistols, deposited on a substratum of cutlass.            

The Dover mail was in its usual genial position that the guard suspected thepassengers, the passengers suspected one another and the guard, they allsuspected everybody else, and the coachman was sure of nothing but the horses;as to which cattle he could with a clear conscience have taken his oath on thetwo Testaments that they were not fit for the journey.            

ìWo-ho!î said the coachman. ìSo, then! One more pull and youíre at the top andbe damned to you, for I have had trouble enough to get you to it!óJoe!î            

ìHalloa!î the guard replied.            

ìWhat oíclock do you make it, Joe?î            

ìTen minutes, good, past eleven.î            

ìMy blood!î ejaculated the vexed coachman, ìand not atop of Shooterís yet!Tst! Yah! Get on with you!î            

The emphatic horse, cut short by the whip in a most decided negative, made adecided scramble for it, and the three other horses followed suit. Once more,the Dover mail struggled on, with the jack-boots of its passengers squashingalong by its side. They had stopped when the coach stopped, and they kept closecompany with it. If any one of the three had had the hardihood to propose toanother to walk on a little ahead into the mist and darkness, he would have puthimself in a fair way of getting shot instantly as a highwayman.            

The last burst carried the mail to the summit of the hill. The horses stoppedto breathe again, and the guard got down to skid the wheel for the descent, andopen the coach-door to let the passengers in.            

ìTst! Joe!î cried the coachman in a warning voice, looking down from hisbox.            

ìWhat do you say, Tom?î            

They both listened.            

ìI say a horse at a canter coming up, Joe.î            

ìI say a horse at a gallop, Tom,î returned the guard, leavinghis hold of the door, and mounting nimbly to his place. ìGentlemen! In thekingís name, all of you!î            

With this hurried adjuration, he cocked his blunderbuss, and stood on theoffensive.            

The passenger booked by this history, was on the coach-step, getting in; thetwo other passengers were close behind him, and about to follow. He remained onthe step, half in the coach and half out of; they remained in the road belowhim. They all looked from the coachman to the guard, and from the guard to thecoachman, and listened. The coachman looked back and the guard looked back, andeven the emphatic leader pricked up his ears and looked back, withoutcontradicting.            

The stillness consequent on the cessation of the rumbling and labouring of thecoach, added to the stillness of the night, made it very quiet indeed. Thepanting of the horses communicated a tremulous motion to the coach, as if itwere in a state of agitation. The hearts of the passengers beat loud enoughperhaps to be heard; but at any rate, the quiet pause was audibly expressive ofpeople out of breath, and holding the breath, and having the pulses quickened byexpectation.            

The sound of a horse at a gallop came fast and furiously up the hill.            

ìSo-ho!î the guard sang out, as loud as he could roar. ìYo there! Stand! Ishall fire!î            

The pace was suddenly checked, and, with much splashing and floundering, amanís voice called from the mist, ìIs that the Dover mail?î            

ìNever you mind what it is!î the guard retorted. ìWhat are you?î            

ìIs that the Dover mail?î            

ìWhy do you want to know?î            

ìI want a passenger, if it is.î            

ìWhat passenger?î            

ìMr. Jarvis Lorry.î            

Our booked passenger showed in a moment that it was his name. The guard, thecoachman, and the two other passengers eyed him distrustfully.            

ìKeep where you are,î the guard called to the voice in the mist, ìbecause, ifI should make a mistake, it could never be set right in your lifetime. Gentlemanof the name of Lorry answer straight.î            

ìWhat is the matter?î asked the passenger, then, with mildly quavering speech.ìWho wants me? Is it Jerry?î            

(ìI donít like Jerryís voice, if it is Jerry,î growled the guard to himself.ìHeís hoarser than suits me, is Jerry.î)            

ìYes, Mr. Lorry.î            

ìWhat is the matter?î            

ìA despatch sent after you from over yonder. T. and Co.î            

ìI know this messenger, guard,î said Mr. Lorry, getting down into theroadóassisted from behind more swiftly than politely by the other twopassengers, who immediately scrambled into the coach, shut the door, and pulledup the window. ìHe may come close; thereís nothing wrong.î            

ìI hope there ainít, but I canít make so ëNation sure of that,î said theguard, in gruff soliloquy. ìHallo you!î            

ìWell! And hallo you!î said Jerry, more hoarsely than before.            

ìCome on at a footpace! díye mind me? And if youíve got holsters to thatsaddle oí yourn, donít let me see your hand go nigh ëem. For Iím a devil at aquick mistake, and when I make one it takes the form of Lead. So now letís lookat you.î            

The figures of a horse and rider came slowly through the eddying mist, andcame to the side of the mail, where the passenger stood. The rider stooped, and,casting up his eyes at the guard, handed the passenger a small folded paper. Theriderís horse was blown, and both horse and rider were covered with mud, fromthe hoofs of the horse to the hat of the man.            

ìGuard!î said the passenger, in a tone of quiet business confidence.            

The watchful guard, with his right hand at the stock of his raisedblunderbuss, his left at the barrel, and his eye on the horseman, answeredcurtly, ìSir.î            

ìThere is nothing to apprehend. I belong to Tellsonís Bank. You must knowTellsonís Bank in London. I am going to Paris on business. A crown to drink. Imay read this?î            

ìIf so be as youíre quick, sir.î            

He opened it in the light of the coach-lamp on that side, and readófirst tohimself and then aloud: ìëWait at Dover for Mamíselle.í Itís not long, you see,guard. Jerry, say that my answer was, RECALLED TO LIFE.î            

Jerry started in his saddle. ìThatís a Blazing strange answer, too,î said he,at his hoarsest.            

ìTake that message back, and they will know that I received this, as well asif I wrote. Make the best of your way. Good night.î            

With those words the passenger opened the coach-door and got in; not at allassisted by his fellow-passengers, who had expeditiously secreted their watchesand purses in their boots, and were now making a general pretence of beingasleep. With no more definite purpose than to escape the hazard of originatingany other kind of action.            

The coach lumbered on again, with heavier wreaths of mist closing round it asit began the descent. The guard soon replaced his blunderbuss in his arm-chest,and, having looked to the rest of its contents, and having looked to thesupplementary pistols that he wore in his belt, looked to a smaller chestbeneath his seat, in which there were a few smithís tools, a couple of torches,and a tinder-box. For he was furnished with that completeness that if thecoach-lamps had been blown and stormed out, which did occasionally happen, hehad only to shut himself up inside, keep the flint and steel sparks well off thestraw, and get a light with tolerable safety and ease (if he were lucky) in fiveminutes.            

ìTom!î softly over the coach roof.            

ìHallo, Joe.î            

ìDid you hear the message?î            

ìI did, Joe.î            

ìWhat did you make of it, Tom?î            

ìNothing at all, Joe.î            

ìThatís a coincidence, too,î the guard mused, ìfor I made the same of itmyself.î            

Jerry, left alone in the mist and darkness, dismounted meanwhile, not only toease his spent horse, but to wipe the mud from his face, and shake the wet outof his hat-brim, which might be capable of holding about half a gallon. Afterstanding with the bridle over his heavily-splashed arm, until the wheels of themail were no longer within hearing and the night was quite still again, heturned to walk down the hill.            

ìAfter that there gallop from Temple Bar, old lady, I wonít trust yourfore-legs till I get you on the level,î said this hoarse messenger, glancing athis mare. ì`Recalled to life.í Thatís a Blazing strange message. Much of thatwouldnít do for you, Jerry! I say, Jerry! Youíd be in a Blazing bad way, ifrecalling to life was to come into fashion, Jerry!î            

A wonderful fact to reflect upon, that every human creature is constituted tobe that profound secret and mystery to every other. A solemn consideration, whenI enter a great city by night, that every one of those darkly clustered housesencloses its own secret; that every room in every one of them encloses its ownsecret; that every beating heart in the hundreds of thousands of breasts there,is, in some of its imaginings, a secret to the heart nearest it! Something ofthe awfulness, even of Death itself, is referable to this. No more can I turnthe leaves of this dear book that I loved, and vainly hope in time to read itall. No more can I look into the depths of this unfathomable water, wherein, asmomentary lights glanced into it, I have had glimpses of buried treasure andother things submerged. It was appointed that the book should shut with aspring, for ever and for ever, when I had read but a page. It was appointed thatthe water should be locked in an eternal frost, when the light was playing onits surface, and I stood in ignorance on the shore. My friend is dead, myneighbour is dead, my love, the darling of my soul, is dead; it is theinexorable consolidation and perpetuation of the secret that was always in thatindividuality, and which I shall carry in mine to my lifeís end. In any of theburial-places of this city through which I pass, is there a sleeper moreinscrutable than its busy inhabitants are, in their innermost personality, tome, or than I am to them?            

As to this, his natural and not to be alienated inheritance, the messenger onhorseback had exactly the same possessions as the King, the first Minister ofState, or the richest merchant in London. So with the three passengers shut upin the narrow compass of one lumbering old mail coach; they were mysteries toone another, as complete as if each had been in his own coach and six, or hisown coach and sixty, with the breadth of a county between him and thenext.            

The messenger rode back at an easy trot, stopping pretty often at ale-housesby the way to drink, but evincing a tendency to keep his own counsel, and tokeep his hat cocked over his eyes. He had eyes that assorted very well with thatdecoration, being of a surface black, with no depth in the colour or form, andmuch too near togetheróas if they were afraid of being found out in something,singly, if they kept too far apart. They had a sinister expression, under an oldcocked-hat like a three-cornered spittoon, and over a great muffler for the chinand throat, which descended nearly to the wearerís knees. When he stopped fordrink, he moved this muffler with his left hand, only while he poured his liquorin with his right; as soon as that was done, he muffled again.            

ìNo, Jerry, no!î said the messenger, harping on one theme as he rode. ìItwouldnít do for you, Jerry. Jerry, you honest tradesman, it wouldnít suit YOURline of business! Recalledó! Bust me if I donít think heíd been adrinking!î            

His message perplexed his mind to that degree that he was fain, several times,to take off his hat to scratch his head. Except on the crown, which was raggedlybald, he had stiff, black hair, standing jaggedly all over it, and growing downhill almost to his broad, blunt nose. It was so like Smithís work, so much morelike the top of a strongly spiked wall than a head of hair, that the best ofplayers at leap-frog might have declined him, as the most dangerous man in theworld to go over.            

While he trotted back with the message he was to deliver to the night watchmanin his box at the door of Tellsonís Bank, by Temple Bar, who was to deliver itto greater authorities within, the shadows of the night took such shapes to himas arose out of the message, and took such shapes to the mare as arose out ofHER private topics of uneasiness. They seemed to be numerous, for she shied atevery shadow on the road.            

What time, the mail-coach lumbered, jolted, rattled, and bumped upon itstedious way, with its three fellow-inscrutables inside. To whom, likewise, theshadows of the night revealed themselves, in the forms their dozing eyes andwandering thoughts suggested.            

Tellsonís Bank had a run upon it in the mail. As the bank passengerówith anarm drawn through the leathern strap, which did what lay in it to keep him frompounding against the next passenger, and driving him into his corner, wheneverthe coach got a special joltónodded in his place, with half-shut eyes, thelittle coach-windows, and the coach-lamp dimly gleaming through them, and thebulky bundle of opposite passenger, became the bank, and did a great stroke ofbusiness. The rattle of the harness was the chink of money, and more drafts werehonoured in five minutes than even Tellsonís, with all its foreign and homeconnection, ever paid in thrice the time. Then the strong-rooms underground, atTellsonís, with such of their valuable stores and secrets as were known to thepassenger (and it was not a little that he knew about them), opened before him,and he went in among them with the great keys and the feebly-burning candle, andfound them safe, and strong, and sound, and still, just as he had last seenthem.            

But, though the bank was almost always with him, and though the coach (in aconfused way, like the presence of pain under an opiate) was always with him,there was another current of impression that never ceased to run, all throughthe night. He was on his way to dig some one out of a grave.            

Now, which of the multitude of faces that showed themselves before him was thetrue face of the buried person, the shadows of the night did not indicate; butthey were all the faces of a man of five-and-forty by years, and they differedprincipally in the passions they expressed, and in the ghastliness of their wornand wasted state. Pride, contempt, defiance, stubbornness, submission,lamentation, succeeded one another; so did varieties of sunken cheek, cadaverouscolour, emaciated hands and figures. But the face was in the main one face, andevery head was prematurely white. A hundred times the dozing passenger inquiredof this spectre:            

ìBuried how long?î            

The answer was always the same: ìAlmost eighteen years.î            

ìYou had abandoned all hope of being dug out?î            

ìLong ago.î            

ìYou know that you are recalled to life?î            

ìThey tell me so.î            

ìI hope you care to live?î            

ìI canít say.î            

ìShall I show her to you? Will you come and see her?î            

The answers to this question were various and contradictory. Sometimes thebroken reply was, ìWait! It would kill me if I saw her too soon.î Sometimes, itwas given in a tender rain of tears, and then it was, ìTake me to her.îSometimes it was staring and bewildered, and then it was, ìI donít know her. Idonít understand.î            

After such imaginary discourse, the passenger in his fancy would dig, and dig,digónow with a spade, now with a great key, now with his handsóto dig thiswretched creature out. Got out at last, with earth hanging about his face andhair, he would suddenly fan away to dust. The passenger would then start tohimself, and lower the window, to get the reality of mist and rain on hischeek.            

Yet even when his eyes were opened on the mist and rain, on the moving patchof light from the lamps, and the hedge at the roadside retreating by jerks, thenight shadows outside the coach would fall into the train of the night shadowswithin. The real Banking-house by Temple Bar, the real business of the past day,the real strong rooms, the real express sent after him, and the real messagereturned, would all be there. Out of the midst of them, the ghostly face wouldrise, and he would accost it again.            

ìBuried how long?î            

ìAlmost eighteen years.î            

ìI hope you care to live?î            

ìI canít say.î            

Digódigódigóuntil an impatient movement from one of the two passengers wouldadmonish him to pull up the window, draw his arm securely through the leathernstrap, and speculate upon the two slumbering forms, until his mind lost its holdof them, and they again slid away into the bank and the grave.            

ìBuried how long?î            

ìAlmost eighteen years.î            

ìYou had abandoned all hope of being dug out?î            

ìLong ago.î            

The words were still in his hearing as just spokenódistinctly in his hearingas ever spoken words had been in his lifeówhen the weary passenger started tothe consciousness of daylight, and found that the shadows of the night weregone.            

He lowered the window, and looked out at the rising sun. There was a ridge ofploughed land, with a plough upon it where it had been left last night when thehorses were unyoked; beyond, a quiet coppice-wood, in which many leaves ofburning red and golden yellow still remained upon the trees. Though the earthwas cold and wet, the sky was clear, and the sun rose bright, placid, andbeautiful.            

ìEighteen years!î said the passenger, looking at the sun. ìGracious Creator ofday! To be buried alive for eighteen years!î            

When the mail got successfully to Dover, in the course of the forenoon, thehead drawer at the Royal George Hotel opened the coach-door as his custom was.He did it with some flourish of ceremony, for a mail journey from London inwinter was an achievement to congratulate an adventurous traveller upon.            

By that time, there was only one adventurous traveller left be congratulated:for the two others had been set down at their respective roadside destinations.The mildewy inside of the coach, with its damp and dirty straw, its disagreeablesmell, and its obscurity, was rather like a larger dog-kennel. Mr. Lorry, thepassenger, shaking himself out of it in chains of straw, a tangle of shaggywrapper, flapping hat, and muddy legs, was rather like a larger sort ofdog.            

ìThere will be a packet to Calais, tomorrow, drawer?î            

ìYes, sir, if the weather holds and the wind sets tolerable fair. The tidewill serve pretty nicely at about two in the afternoon, sir. Bed, sir?î            

ìI shall not go to bed till night; but I want a bedroom, and a barber.î            

ìAnd then breakfast, sir? Yes, sir. That way, sir, if you please. ShowConcord! Gentlemanís valise and hot water to Concord. Pull off gentlemanís bootsin Concord. (You will find a fine sea-coal fire, sir.) Fetch barber to Concord.Stir about there, now, for Concord!î            

The Concord bed-chamber being always assigned to a passenger by the mail, andpassengers by the mail being always heavily wrapped up from head to foot, theroom had the odd interest for the establishment of the Royal George, thatalthough but one kind of man was seen to go into it, all kinds and varieties ofmen came out of it. Consequently, another drawer, and two porters, and severalmaids and the landlady, were all loitering by accident at various points of theroad between the Concord and the coffee-room, when a gentleman of sixty,formally dressed in a brown suit of clothes, pretty well worn, but very wellkept, with large square cuffs and large flaps to the pockets, passed along onhis way to his breakfast.            

The coffee-room had no other occupant, that forenoon, than the gentleman inbrown. His breakfast-table was drawn before the fire, and as he sat, with itslight shining on him, waiting for the meal, he sat so still, that he might havebeen sitting for his portrait.            

Very orderly and methodical he looked, with a hand on each knee, and a loudwatch ticking a sonorous sermon under his flapped waist-coat, as though itpitted its gravity and longevity against the levity and evanescence of the briskfire. He had a good leg, and was a little vain of it, for his brown stockingsfitted sleek and close, and were of a fine texture; his shoes and buckles, too,though plain, were trim. He wore an odd little sleek crisp flaxen wig, settingvery close to his head: which wig, it is to be presumed, was made of hair, butwhich looked far more as though it were spun from filaments of silk or glass.His linen, though not of a fineness in accordance with his stockings, was aswhite as the tops of the waves that broke upon the neighbouring beach, or thespecks of sail that glinted in the sunlight far at sea. A face habituallysuppressed and quieted, was still lighted up under the quaint wig by a pair ofmoist bright eyes that it must have cost their owner, in years gone by, somepains to drill to the composed and reserved expression of Tellsonís Bank. He hada healthy colour in his cheeks, and his face, though lined, bore few traces ofanxiety. But, perhaps the confidential bachelor clerks in Tellsonís Bank wereprincipally occupied with the cares of other people; and perhaps second-handcares, like second-hand clothes, come easily off and on.            

Completing his resemblance to a man who was sitting for his portrait, Mr.Lorry dropped off to sleep. The arrival of his breakfast roused him, and he saidto the drawer, as he moved his chair to it:            

ìI wish accommodation prepared for a young lady who may come here at any timeto-day. She may ask for Mr. Jarvis Lorry, or she may only ask for a gentlemanfrom Tellsonís Bank. Please to let me know.î            

ìYes, sir. Tellsonís Bank in London, sir?î            

ìYes.î            

ìYes, sir. We have oftentimes the honour to entertain your gentlemen in theirtravelling backwards and forwards betwixt London and Paris, sir. A vast deal oftravelling, sir, in Tellson and Companyís House.î            

ìYes. We are quite a French House, as well as an English one.î            

ìYes, sir. Not much in the habit of such travelling yourself, I think,sir?î            

ìNot of late years. It is fifteen years since weósince Iócame last fromFrance.î            

ìIndeed, sir? That was before my time here, sir. Before our peopleís timehere, sir. The George was in other hands at that time, sir.î            

ìI believe so.î            

ìBut I would hold a pretty wager, sir, that a House like Tellson and Companywas flourishing, a matter of fifty, not to speak of fifteen years ago?î            

ìYou might treble that, and say a hundred and fifty, yet not be far from thetruth.î            

ìIndeed, sir!î            

Rounding his mouth and both his eyes, as he stepped backward from the table,the waiter shifted his napkin from his right arm to his left, dropped into acomfortable attitude, and stood surveying the guest while he ate and drank, asfrom an observatory or watchtower. According to the immemorial usage of waitersin all ages.            

When Mr. Lorry had finished his breakfast, he went out for a stroll on thebeach. The little narrow, crooked town of Dover hid itself away from the beach,and ran its head into the chalk cliffs, like a marine ostrich. The beach was adesert of heaps of sea and stones tumbling wildly about, and the sea did what itliked, and what it liked was destruction. It thundered at the town, andthundered at the cliffs, and brought the coast down, madly. The air among thehouses was of so strong a piscatory flavour that one might have supposed sickfish went up to be dipped in it, as sick people went down to be dipped in thesea. A little fishing was done in the port, and a quantity of strolling about bynight, and looking seaward: particularly at those times when the tide made, andwas near flood. Small tradesmen, who did no business whatever, sometimesunaccountably realised large fortunes, and it was remarkable that nobody in theneighbourhood could endure a lamplighter.            

As the day declined into the afternoon, and the air, which had been atintervals clear enough to allow the French coast to be seen, became againcharged with mist and vapour, Mr. Lorryís thoughts seemed to cloud too. When itwas dark, and he sat before the coffee-room fire, awaiting his dinner as he hadawaited his breakfast, his mind was busily digging, digging, digging, in thelive red coals.            

A bottle of good claret after dinner does a digger in the red coals no harm,otherwise than as it has a tendency to throw him out of work. Mr. Lorry had beenidle a long time, and had just poured out his last glassful of wine with ascomplete an appearance of satisfaction as is ever to be found in an elderlygentleman of a fresh complexion who has got to the end of a bottle, when arattling of wheels came up the narrow street, and rumbled into theinn-yard.            

He set down his glass untouched. ìThis is Mamíselle!î said he.            

In a very few minutes the waiter came in to announce that Miss Manette hadarrived from London, and would be happy to see the gentleman fromTellsonís.            

ìSo soon?î            

Miss Manette had taken some refreshment on the road, and required none then,and was extremely anxious to see the gentleman from Tellsonís immediately, if itsuited his pleasure and convenience.            

The gentleman from Tellsonís had nothing left for it but to empty his glasswith an air of stolid desperation, settle his odd little flaxen wig at the ears,and follow the waiter to Miss Manetteís apartment. It was a large, dark room,furnished in a funereal manner with black horsehair, and loaded with heavy darktables. These had been oiled and oiled, until the two tall candles on the tablein the middle of the room were gloomily reflected on every leaf; as if THEY wereburied, in deep graves of black mahogany, and no light to speak of could beexpected from them until they were dug out.            

The obscurity was so difficult to penetrate that Mr. Lorry, picking his wayover the well-worn Turkey carpet, supposed Miss Manette to be, for the moment,in some adjacent room, until, having got past the two tall candles, he sawstanding to receive him by the table between them and the fire, a young lady ofnot more than seventeen, in a riding-cloak, and still holding her strawtravelling-hat by its ribbon in her hand. As his eyes rested on a short, slight,pretty figure, a quantity of golden hair, a pair of blue eyes that met his ownwith an inquiring look, and a forehead with a singular capacity (remembering howyoung and smooth it was), of rifting and knitting itself into an expression thatwas not quite one of perplexity, or wonder, or alarm, or merely of a brightfixed attention, though it included all the four expressionsóas his eyes restedon these things, a sudden vivid likeness passed before him, of a child whom hehad held in his arms on the passage across that very Channel, one cold time,when the hail drifted heavily and the sea ran high. The likeness passed away,like a breath along the surface of the gaunt pier-glass behind her, on the frameof which, a hospital procession of negro cupids, several headless and allcripples, were offering black baskets of Dead Sea fruit to black divinities ofthe feminine genderóand he made his formal bow to Miss Manette.            

ìPray take a seat, sir.î In a very clear and pleasant young voice; a littleforeign in its accent, but a very little indeed.            

ìI kiss your hand, miss,î said Mr. Lorry, with the manners of an earlier date,as he made his formal bow again, and took his seat.            

ìI received a letter from the Bank, sir, yesterday, informing me that someintelligenceóor discoveryóî            

ìThe word is not material, miss; either word will do.î            

ìórespecting the small property of my poor father, whom I never sawóso longdeadóî            

Mr. Lorry moved in his chair, and cast a troubled look towards the hospitalprocession of negro cupids. As if THEY had any help for anybody in their absurdbaskets!            

ìórendered it necessary that I should go to Paris, there to communicate with agentleman of the Bank, so good as to be despatched to Paris for thepurpose.î            

ìMyself.î            

ìAs I was prepared to hear, sir.î            

She curtseyed to him (young ladies made curtseys in those days), with a prettydesire to convey to him that she felt how much older and wiser he was than she.He made her another bow.            

ìI replied to the Bank, sir, that as it was considered necessary, by those whoknow, and who are so kind as to advise me, that I should go to France, and thatas I am an orphan and have no friend who could go with me, I should esteem ithighly if I might be permitted to place myself, during the journey, under thatworthy gentlemanís protection. The gentleman had left London, but I think amessenger was sent after him to beg the favour of his waiting for mehere.î            

ìI was happy,î said Mr. Lorry, ìto be entrusted with the charge. I shall bemore happy to execute it.î            

ìSir, I thank you indeed. I thank you very gratefully. It was told me by theBank that the gentleman would explain to me the details of the business, andthat I must prepare myself to find them of a surprising nature. I have done mybest to prepare myself, and I naturally have a strong and eager interest to knowwhat they are.î            

ìNaturally,î said Mr. Lorry. ìYesóIóî            

After a pause, he added, again settling the crisp flaxen wig at the ears, ìItis very difficult to begin.î            

He did not begin, but, in his indecision, met her glance. The young foreheadlifted itself into that singular expressionóbut it was pretty andcharacteristic, besides being singularóand she raised her hand, as if with aninvoluntary action she caught at, or stayed some passing shadow.            

ìAre you quite a stranger to me, sir?î            

ìAm I not?î Mr. Lorry opened his hands, and extended them outwards with anargumentative smile.            

Between the eyebrows and just over the little feminine nose, the line of whichwas as delicate and fine as it was possible to be, the expression deepeneditself as she took her seat thoughtfully in the chair by which she had hithertoremained standing. He watched her as she mused, and the moment she raised hereyes again, went on:            

ìIn your adopted country, I presume, I cannot do better than address you as ayoung English lady, Miss Manette?î            

ìIf you please, sir.î            

ìMiss Manette, I am a man of business. I have a business charge to acquitmyself of. In your reception of it, donít heed me any more than if I was aspeaking machineótruly, I am not much else. I will, with your leave, relate toyou, miss, the story of one of our customers.î            

ìStory!î            

He seemed wilfully to mistake the word she had repeated, when he added, in ahurry, ìYes, customers; in the banking business we usually call our connectionour customers. He was a French gentleman; a scientific gentleman; a man of greatacquirementsóa Doctor.î            

ìNot of Beauvais?î            

ìWhy, yes, of Beauvais. Like Monsieur Manette, your father, the gentleman wasof Beauvais. Like Monsieur Manette, your father, the gentleman was of repute inParis. I had the honour of knowing him there. Our relations were businessrelations, but confidential. I was at that time in our French House, and hadbeenóoh! twenty years.î            

ìAt that timeóI may ask, at what time, sir?î            

ìI speak, miss, of twenty years ago. He marriedóan English ladyóand I was oneof the trustees. His affairs, like the affairs of many other French gentlemenand French families, were entirely in Tellsonís hands. In a similar way I am, orI have been, trustee of one kind or other for scores of our customers. These aremere business relations, miss; there is no friendship in them, no particularinterest, nothing like sentiment. I have passed from one to another, in thecourse of my business life, just as I pass from one of our customers to anotherin the course of my business day; in short, I have no feelings; I am a meremachine. To go onóî            

ìBut this is my fatherís story, sir; and I begin to thinkîóthe curiouslyroughened forehead was very intent upon himóìthat when I was left an orphanthrough my motherís surviving my father only two years, it was you who broughtme to England. I am almost sure it was you.î            

Mr. Lorry took the hesitating little hand that confidingly advanced to takehis, and he put it with some ceremony to his lips. He then conducted the younglady straightway to her chair again, and, holding the chair-back with his lefthand, and using his right by turns to rub his chin, pull his wig at the ears, orpoint what he said, stood looking down into her face while she sat looking upinto his.            

ìMiss Manette, it WAS I. And you will see how truly I spoke of myself justnow, in saying I had no feelings, and that all the relations I hold with myfellow-creatures are mere business relations, when you reflect that I have neverseen you since. No; you have been the ward of Tellsonís House since, and I havebeen busy with the other business of Tellsonís House since. Feelings! I have notime for them, no chance of them. I pass my whole life, miss, in turning animmense pecuniary Mangle.î            

After this odd description of his daily routine of employment, Mr. Lorryflattened his flaxen wig upon his head with both hands (which was mostunnecessary, for nothing could be flatter than its shining surface was before),and resumed his former attitude.            

ìSo far, miss (as you have remarked), this is the story of your regrettedfather. Now comes the difference. If your father had not died when he didóDonítbe frightened! How you start!î            

She did, indeed, start. And she caught his wrist with both her hands.            

ìPray,î said Mr. Lorry, in a soothing tone, bringing his left hand from theback of the chair to lay it on the supplicatory fingers that clasped him in soviolent a tremble: ìpray control your agitationóa matter of business. As I wassayingóî            

Her look so discomposed him that he stopped, wandered, and began anew:            

ìAs I was saying; if Monsieur Manette had not died; if he had suddenly andsilently disappeared; if he had been spirited away; if it had not been difficultto guess to what dreadful place, though no art could trace him; if he had anenemy in some compatriot who could exercise a privilege that I in my own timehave known the boldest people afraid to speak of in a whisper, across the waterthere; for instance, the privilege of filling up blank forms for the consignmentof any one to the oblivion of a prison for any length of time; if his wife hadimplored the king, the queen, the court, the clergy, for any tidings of him, andall quite in vain;óthen the history of your father would have been the historyof this unfortunate gentleman, the Doctor of Beauvais.î            

ìI entreat you to tell me more, sir.î            

ìI will. I am going to. You can bear it?î            

ìI can bear anything but the uncertainty you leave me in at thismoment.î            

ìYou speak collectedly, and youóARE collected. Thatís good!î (Though hismanner was less satisfied than his words.) ìA matter of business. Regard it as amatter of businessóbusiness that must be done. Now if this doctorís wife, thougha lady of great courage and spirit, had suffered so intensely from this causebefore her little child was bornóî            

ìThe little child was a daughter, sir.î            

ìA daughter. A-a-matter of businessódonít be distressed. Miss, if the poorlady had suffered so intensely before her little child was born, that she cameto the determination of sparing the poor child the inheritance of any part ofthe agony she had known the pains of, by rearing her in the belief that herfather was deadóNo, donít kneel! In Heavenís name why should you kneel tome!î            

ìFor the truth. O dear, good, compassionate sir, for the truth!î            

ìAóa matter of business. You confuse me, and how can I transact business if Iam confused? Let us be clear-headed. If you could kindly mention now, forinstance, what nine times ninepence are, or how many shillings in twentyguineas, it would be so encouraging. I should be so much more at my ease aboutyour state of mind.î            

Without directly answering to this appeal, she sat so still when he had verygently raised her, and the hands that had not ceased to clasp his wrists were somuch more steady than they had been, that she communicated some reassurance toMr. Jarvis Lorry.            

ìThatís right, thatís right. Courage! Business! You have business before you;useful business. Miss Manette, your mother took this course with you. And whenshe diedóI believe broken-heartedóhaving never slackened her unavailing searchfor your father, she left you, at two years old, to grow to be blooming,beautiful, and happy, without the dark cloud upon you of living in uncertaintywhether your father soon wore his heart out in prison, or wasted there throughmany lingering years.î            

As he said the words he looked down, with an admiring pity, on the flowinggolden hair; as if he pictured to himself that it might have been already tingedwith grey.            

ìYou know that your parents had no great possession, and that what they hadwas secured to your mother and to you. There has been no new discovery, ofmoney, or of any other property; butóî            

He felt his wrist held closer, and he stopped. The expression in the forehead,which had so particularly attracted his notice, and which was now immovable, haddeepened into one of pain and horror.            

ìBut he has beenóbeen found. He is alive. Greatly changed, it is too probable;almost a wreck, it is possible; though we will hope the best. Still, alive. Yourfather has been taken to the house of an old servant in Paris, and we are goingthere: I, to identify him if I can: you, to restore him to life, love, duty,rest, comfort.î            

A shiver ran through her frame, and from it through his. She said, in a low,distinct, awe-stricken voice, as if she were saying it in a dream,            

ìI am going to see his Ghost! It will be his Ghostónot him!î            

Mr. Lorry quietly chafed the hands that held his arm. ìThere, there, there!See now, see now! The best and the worst are known to you, now. You are well onyour way to the poor wronged gentleman, and, with a fair sea voyage, and a fairland journey, you will be soon at his dear side.î            

She repeated in the same tone, sunk to a whisper, ìI have been free, I havebeen happy, yet his Ghost has never haunted me!î            

ìOnly one thing more,î said Mr. Lorry, laying stress upon it as a wholesomemeans of enforcing her attention: ìhe has been found under another name; hisown, long forgotten or long concealed. It would be worse than useless now toinquire which; worse than useless to seek to know whether he has been for yearsoverlooked, or always designedly held prisoner. It would be worse than uselessnow to make any inquiries, because it would be dangerous. Better not to mentionthe subject, anywhere or in any way, and to remove himófor a while at alleventsóout of France. Even I, safe as an Englishman, and even Tellsonís,important as they are to French credit, avoid all naming of the matter. I carryabout me, not a scrap of writing openly referring to it. This is a secretservice altogether. My credentials, entries, and memoranda, are all comprehendedin the one line, `Recalled to Life;í which may mean anything. But what is thematter! She doesnít notice a word! Miss Manette!î            

Perfectly still and silent, and not even fallen back in her chair, she satunder his hand, utterly insensible; with her eyes open and fixed upon him, andwith that last expression looking as if it were carved or branded into herforehead. So close was her hold upon his arm, that he feared to detach himselflest he should hurt her; therefore he called out loudly for assistance withoutmoving.            

A wild-looking woman, whom even in his agitation, Mr. Lorry observed to be allof a red colour, and to have red hair, and to be dressed in some extraordinarytight-fitting fashion, and to have on her head a most wonderful bonnet like aGrenadier wooden measure, and good measure too, or a great Stilton cheese, camerunning into the room in advance of the inn servants, and soon settled thequestion of his detachment from the poor young lady, by laying a brawny handupon his chest, and sending him flying back against the nearest wall.            

(ìI really think this must be a man!î was Mr. Lorryís breathless reflection,simultaneously with his coming against the wall.)            

ìWhy, look at you all!î bawled this figure, addressing the inn servants. ìWhydonít you go and fetch things, instead of standing there staring at me? I am notso much to look at, am I? Why donít you go and fetch things? Iíll let you know,if you donít bring smelling-salts, cold water, and vinegar, quick, Iwill.î            

There was an immediate dispersal for these restoratives, and she softly laidthe patient on a sofa, and tended her with great skill and gentleness: callingher ìmy precious!î and ìmy bird!î and spreading her golden hair aside over hershoulders with great pride and care.            

ìAnd you in brown!î she said, indignantly turning to Mr. Lorry; ìcouldnít youtell her what you had to tell her, without frightening her to death? Look ather, with her pretty pale face and her cold hands. Do you call THAT being aBanker?î            

Mr. Lorry was so exceedingly disconcerted by a question so hard to answer,that he could only look on, at a distance, with much feebler sympathy andhumility, while the strong woman, having banished the inn servants under themysterious penalty of ìletting them knowî something not mentioned if they stayedthere, staring, recovered her charge by a regular series of gradations, andcoaxed her to lay her drooping head upon her shoulder.            

ìI hope she will do well now,î said Mr. Lorry.            

ìNo thanks to you in brown, if she does. My darling pretty!î            

ìI hope,î said Mr. Lorry, after another pause of feeble sympathy and humility,ìthat you accompany Miss Manette to France?î            

ìA likely thing, too!î replied the strong woman. ìIf it was ever intended thatI should go across salt water, do you suppose Providence would have cast my lotin an island?î            

This being another question hard to answer, Mr. Jarvis Lorry withdrew toconsider it.            

A large cask of wine had been dropped and broken, in the street. The accidenthad happened in getting it out of a cart; the cask had tumbled out with a run,the hoops had burst, and it lay on the stones just outside the door of thewine-shop, shattered like a walnut-shell.            

All the people within reach had suspended their business, or their idleness,to run to the spot and drink the wine. The rough, irregular stones of thestreet, pointing every way, and designed, one might have thought, expressly tolame all living creatures that approached them, had dammed it into little pools;these were surrounded, each by its own jostling group or crowd, according to itssize. Some men kneeled down, made scoops of their two hands joined, and sipped,or tried to help women, who bent over their shoulders, to sip, before the winehad all run out between their fingers. Others, men and women, dipped in thepuddles with little mugs of mutilated earthenware, or even with handkerchiefsfrom womenís heads, which were squeezed dry into infantsí mouths; others madesmall mud-embankments, to stem the wine as it ran; others, directed bylookers-on up at high windows, darted here and there, to cut off little streamsof wine that started away in new directions; others devoted themselves to thesodden and lee-dyed pieces of the cask, licking, and even champing the moisterwine-rotted fragments with eager relish. There was no drainage to carry off thewine, and not only did it all get taken up, but so much mud got taken up alongwith it, that there might have been a scavenger in the street, if anybodyacquainted with it could have believed in such a miraculous presence.            

A shrill sound of laughter and of amused voicesóvoices of men, women, andchildrenóresounded in the street while this wine game lasted. There was littleroughness in the sport, and much playfulness. There was a special companionshipin it, an observable inclination on the part of every one to join some otherone, which led, especially among the luckier or lighter-hearted, to frolicsomeembraces, drinking of healths, shaking of hands, and even joining of hands anddancing, a dozen together. When the wine was gone, and the places where it hadbeen most abundant were raked into a gridiron-pattern by fingers, thesedemonstrations ceased, as suddenly as they had broken out. The man who had lefthis saw sticking in the firewood he was cutting, set it in motion again; thewomen who had left on a door-step the little pot of hot ashes, at which she hadbeen trying to soften the pain in her own starved fingers and toes, or in thoseof her child, returned to it; men with bare arms, matted locks, and cadaverousfaces, who had emerged into the winter light from cellars, moved away, todescend again; and a gloom gathered on the scene that appeared more natural toit than sunshine.            

The wine was red wine, and had stained the ground of the narrow street in thesuburb of Saint Antoine, in Paris, where it was spilled. It had stained manyhands, too, and many faces, and many naked feet, and many wooden shoes. Thehands of the man who sawed the wood, left red marks on the billets; and theforehead of the woman who nursed her baby, was stained with the stain of the oldrag she wound about her head again. Those who had been greedy with the staves ofthe cask, had acquired a tigerish smear about the mouth; and one tall joker sobesmirched, his head more out of a long squalid bag of a nightcap than in it,scrawled upon a wall with his finger dipped in muddy wine-leesóBLOOD.            

The time was to come, when that wine too would be spilled on thestreet-stones, and when the stain of it would be red upon many there.            

And now that the cloud settled on Saint Antoine, which a momentary gleam haddriven from his sacred countenance, the darkness of it was heavyócold, dirt,sickness, ignorance, and want, were the lords in waiting on the saintlypresenceónobles of great power all of them; but, most especially the last.Samples of a people that had undergone a terrible grinding and regrinding in themill, and certainly not in the fabulous mill which ground old people young,shivered at every corner, passed in and out at every doorway, looked from everywindow, fluttered in every vestige of a garment that the wind shook. The millwhich had worked them down, was the mill that grinds young people old; thechildren had ancient faces and grave voices; and upon them, and upon the grownfaces, and ploughed into every furrow of age and coming up afresh, was the sigh,Hunger. It was prevalent everywhere. Hunger was pushed out of the tall houses,in the wretched clothing that hung upon poles and lines; Hunger was patched intothem with straw and rag and wood and paper; Hunger was repeated in everyfragment of the small modicum of firewood that the man sawed off; Hunger stareddown from the smokeless chimneys, and stared up from the filthy street that hadno offal, among its refuse, of anything to eat. Hunger was the inscription onthe bakerís shelves, written in every small loaf of his scanty stock of badbread; at the sausage-shop, in every dead-dog preparation that was offered forsale. Hunger rattled its dry bones among the roasting chestnuts in the turnedcylinder; Hunger was shred into atomics in every farthing porringer of huskychips of potato, fried with some reluctant drops of oil.            

Its abiding place was in all things fitted to it. A narrow winding street,full of offence and stench, with other narrow winding streets diverging, allpeopled by rags and nightcaps, and all smelling of rags and nightcaps, and allvisible things with a brooding look upon them that looked ill. In the hunted airof the people there was yet some wild-beast thought of the possibility ofturning at bay. Depressed and slinking though they were, eyes of fire were notwanting among them; nor compressed lips, white with what they suppressed; norforeheads knitted into the likeness of the gallows-rope they mused aboutenduring, or inflicting. The trade signs (and they were almost as many as theshops) were, all, grim illustrations of Want. The butcher and the porkmanpainted up, only the leanest scrags of meat; the baker, the coarsest of meagreloaves. The people rudely pictured as drinking in the wine-shops, croaked overtheir scanty measures of thin wine and beer, and were gloweringly confidentialtogether. Nothing was represented in a flourishing condition, save tools andweapons; but, the cutlerís knives and axes were sharp and bright, the smithíshammers were heavy, and the gunmakerís stock was murderous. The crippling stonesof the pavement, with their many little reservoirs of mud and water, had nofootways, but broke off abruptly at the doors. The kennel, to make amends, randown the middle of the streetówhen it ran at all: which was only after heavyrains, and then it ran, by many eccentric fits, into the houses. Across thestreets, at wide intervals, one clumsy lamp was slung by a rope and pulley; atnight, when the lamplighter had let these down, and lighted, and hoisted themagain, a feeble grove of dim wicks swung in a sickly manner overhead, as if theywere at sea. Indeed they were at sea, and the ship and crew were in peril oftempest.            

For, the time was to come, when the gaunt scarecrows of that region shouldhave watched the lamplighter, in their idleness and hunger, so long, as toconceive the idea of improving on his method, and hauling up men by those ropesand pulleys, to flare upon the darkness of their condition. But, the time wasnot come yet; and every wind that blew over France shook the rags of thescarecrows in vain, for the birds, fine of song and feather, took nowarning.            

The wine-shop was a corner shop, better than most others in its appearance anddegree, and the master of the wine-shop had stood outside it, in a yellowwaistcoat and green breeches, looking on at the struggle for the lost wine.ìItís not my affair,î said he, with a final shrug of the shoulders. ìThe peoplefrom the market did it. Let them bring another.î            

There, his eyes happening to catch the tall joker writing up his joke, hecalled to him across the way:            

ìSay, then, my Gaspard, what do you do there?î            

The fellow pointed to his joke with immense significance, as is often the waywith his tribe. It missed its mark, and completely failed, as is often the waywith his tribe too.            

ìWhat now? Are you a subject for the mad hospital?î said the wine-shop keeper,crossing the road, and obliterating the jest with a handful of mud, picked upfor the purpose, and smeared over it. ìWhy do you write in the public streets?Is thereótell me thouóis there no other place to write such words in?î            

In his expostulation he dropped his cleaner hand (perhaps accidentally,perhaps not) upon the jokerís heart. The joker rapped it with his own, took animble spring upward, and came down in a fantastic dancing attitude, with one ofhis stained shoes jerked off his foot into his hand, and held out. A joker of anextremely, not to say wolfishly practical character, he looked, under thosecircumstances.            

ìPut it on, put it on,î said the other. ìCall wine, wine; and finish there.îWith that advice, he wiped his soiled hand upon the jokerís dress, such as itwasóquite deliberately, as having dirtied the hand on his account; and thenrecrossed the road and entered the wine-shop.            

This wine-shop keeper was a bull-necked, martial-looking man of thirty, and heshould have been of a hot temperament, for, although it was a bitter day, hewore no coat, but carried one slung over his shoulder. His shirt-sleeves wererolled up, too, and his brown arms were bare to the elbows. Neither did he wearanything more on his head than his own crisply-curling short dark hair. He was adark man altogether, with good eyes and a good bold breadth between them.Good-humoured looking on the whole, but implacable-looking, too; evidently a manof a strong resolution and a set purpose; a man not desirable to be met, rushingdown a narrow pass with a gulf on either side, for nothing would turn theman.            

Madame Defarge, his wife, sat in the shop behind the counter as he came in.Madame Defarge was a stout woman of about his own age, with a watchful eye thatseldom seemed to look at anything, a large hand heavily ringed, a steady face,strong features, and great composure of manner. There was a character aboutMadame Defarge, from which one might have predicated that she did not often makemistakes against herself in any of the reckonings over which she presided.Madame Defarge being sensitive to cold, was wrapped in fur, and had a quantityof bright shawl twined about her head, though not to the concealment of herlarge earrings. Her knitting was before her, but she had laid it down to pickher teeth with a toothpick. Thus engaged, with her right elbow supported by herleft hand, Madame Defarge said nothing when her lord came in, but coughed justone grain of cough. This, in combination with the lifting of her darkly definedeyebrows over her toothpick by the breadth of a line, suggested to her husbandthat he would do well to look round the shop among the customers, for any newcustomer who had dropped in while he stepped over the way.            

The wine-shop keeper accordingly rolled his eyes about, until they rested uponan elderly gentleman and a young lady, who were seated in a corner. Othercompany were there: two playing cards, two playing dominoes, three standing bythe counter lengthening out a short supply of wine. As he passed behind thecounter, he took notice that the elderly gentleman said in a look to the younglady, ìThis is our man.î            

ìWhat the devil YOU do in that galley there?î said Monsieur Defarge tohimself; ìI donít know you.î            

But, he feigned not to notice the two strangers, and fell into discourse withthe triumvirate of customers who were drinking at the counter.            

ìHow goes it, Jacques?î said one of these three to Monsieur Defarge. ìIs allthe spilt wine swallowed?î            

ìEvery drop, Jacques,î answered Monsieur Defarge.            

When this interchange of Christian name was effected, Madame Defarge, pickingher teeth with her toothpick, coughed another grain of cough, and raised hereyebrows by the breadth of another line.            

ìIt is not often,î said the second of the three, addressing Monsieur Defarge,ìthat many of these miserable beasts know the taste of wine, or of anything butblack bread and death. Is it not so, Jacques?î            

ìIt is so, Jacques,î Monsieur Defarge returned.            

At this second interchange of the Christian name, Madame Defarge, still usingher toothpick with profound composure, coughed another grain of cough, andraised her eyebrows by the breadth of another line.            

The last of the three now said his say, as he put down his empty drinkingvessel and smacked his lips.            

ìAh! So much the worse! A bitter taste it is that such poor cattle always havein their mouths, and hard lives they live, Jacques. Am I right, Jacques?î            

ìYou are right, Jacques,î was the response of Monsieur Defarge.            

This third interchange of the Christian name was completed at the moment whenMadame Defarge put her toothpick by, kept her eyebrows up, and slightly rustledin her seat.            

ìHold then! True!î muttered her husband. ìGentlemenómy wife!î            

The three customers pulled off their hats to Madame Defarge, with threeflourishes. She acknowledged their homage by bending her head, and giving them aquick look. Then she glanced in a casual manner round the wine-shop, took up herknitting with great apparent calmness and repose of spirit, and became absorbedin it.            

ìGentlemen,î said her husband, who had kept his bright eye observantly uponher, ìgood day. The chamber, furnished bachelor-fashion, that you wished to see,and were inquiring for when I stepped out, is on the fifth floor. The doorway ofthe staircase gives on the little courtyard close to the left here,î pointingwith his hand, ìnear to the window of my establishment. But, now that Iremember, one of you has already been there, and can show the way. Gentlemen,adieu!î            

They paid for their wine, and left the place. The eyes of Monsieur Defargewere studying his wife at her knitting when the elderly gentleman advanced fromhis corner, and begged the favour of a word.            

ìWillingly, sir,î said Monsieur Defarge, and quietly stepped with him to thedoor.            

Their conference was very short, but very decided. Almost at the first word,Monsieur Defarge started and became deeply attentive. It had not lasted aminute, when he nodded and went out. The gentleman then beckoned to the younglady, and they, too, went out. Madame Defarge knitted with nimble fingers andsteady eyebrows, and saw nothing.            

Mr. Jarvis Lorry and Miss Manette, emerging from the wine-shop thus, joinedMonsieur Defarge in the doorway to which he had directed his own company justbefore. It opened from a stinking little black courtyard, and was the generalpublic entrance to a great pile of houses, inhabited by a great number ofpeople. In the gloomy tile-paved entry to the gloomy tile-paved staircase,Monsieur Defarge bent down on one knee to the child of his old master, and puther hand to his lips. It was a gentle action, but not at all gently done; a veryremarkable transformation had come over him in a few seconds. He had nogood-humour in his face, nor any openness of aspect left, but had become asecret, angry, dangerous man.            

ìIt is very high; it is a little difficult. Better to begin slowly.î Thus,Monsieur Defarge, in a stern voice, to Mr. Lorry, as they began ascending thestairs.            

ìIs he alone?î the latter whispered.            

ìAlone! God help him, who should be with him!î said the other, in the same lowvoice.            

ìIs he always alone, then?î            

ìYes.î            

ìOf his own desire?î            

ìOf his own necessity. As he was, when I first saw him after they found me anddemanded to know if I would take him, and, at my peril be discreetóas he wasthen, so he is now.î            

ìHe is greatly changed?î            

ìChanged!î            

The keeper of the wine-shop stopped to strike the wall with his hand, andmutter a tremendous curse. No direct answer could have been half so forcible.Mr. Lorryís spirits grew heavier and heavier, as he and his two companionsascended higher and higher.            

Such a staircase, with its accessories, in the older and more crowded parts ofParis, would be bad enough now; but, at that time, it was vile indeed tounaccustomed and unhardened senses. Every little habitation within the greatfoul nest of one high buildingóthat is to say, the room or rooms within everydoor that opened on the general staircaseóleft its own heap of refuse on its ownlanding, besides flinging other refuse from its own windows. The uncontrollableand hopeless mass of decomposition so engendered, would have polluted the air,even if poverty and deprivation had not loaded it with their intangibleimpurities; the two bad sources combined made it almost insupportable. Throughsuch an atmosphere, by a steep dark shaft of dirt and poison, the way lay.Yielding to his own disturbance of mind, and to his young companionís agitation,which became greater every instant, Mr. Jarvis Lorry twice stopped to rest. Eachof these stoppages was made at a doleful grating, by which any languishing goodairs that were left uncorrupted, seemed to escape, and all spoilt and sicklyvapours seemed to crawl in. Through the rusted bars, tastes, rather thanglimpses, were caught of the jumbled neighbourhood; and nothing within range,nearer or lower than the summits of the two great towers of Notre-Dame, had anypromise on it of healthy life or wholesome aspirations.            

At last, the top of the staircase was gained, and they stopped for the thirdtime. There was yet an upper staircase, of a steeper inclination and ofcontracted dimensions, to be ascended, before the garret story was reached. Thekeeper of the wine-shop, always going a little in advance, and always going onthe side which Mr. Lorry took, as though he dreaded to be asked any question bythe young lady, turned himself about here, and, carefully feeling in the pocketsof the coat he carried over his shoulder, took out a key.            

ìThe door is locked then, my friend?î said Mr. Lorry, surprised.            

ìAy. Yes,î was the grim reply of Monsieur Defarge.            

ìYou think it necessary to keep the unfortunate gentleman so retired?î            

ìI think it necessary to turn the key.î Monsieur Defarge whispered it closerin his ear, and frowned heavily.            

ìWhy?î            

ìWhy! Because he has lived so long, locked up, that he would befrightenedóraveótear himself to piecesódieócome to I know not what harmóif hisdoor was left open.î            

ìIs it possible!î exclaimed Mr. Lorry.            

ìIs it possible!î repeated Defarge, bitterly. ìYes. And a beautiful world welive in, when it IS possible, and when many other such things are possible, andnot only possible, but doneódone, see you!óunder that sky there, every day. Longlive the Devil. Let us go on.î            

This dialogue had been held in so very low a whisper, that not a word of ithad reached the young ladyís ears. But, by this time she trembled under suchstrong emotion, and her face expressed such deep anxiety, and, above all, suchdread and terror, that Mr. Lorry felt it incumbent on him to speak a word or twoof reassurance.            

ìCourage, dear miss! Courage! Business! The worst will be over in a moment; itis but passing the room-door, and the worst is over. Then, all the good youbring to him, all the relief, all the happiness you bring to him, begin. Let ourgood friend here, assist you on that side. Thatís well, friend Defarge. Come,now. Business, business!î            

They went up slowly and softly. The staircase was short, and they were soon atthe top. There, as it had an abrupt turn in it, they came all at once in sightof three men, whose heads were bent down close together at the side of a door,and who were intently looking into the room to which the door belonged, throughsome chinks or holes in the wall. On hearing footsteps close at hand, thesethree turned, and rose, and showed themselves to be the three of one name whohad been drinking in the wine-shop.            

ìI forgot them in the surprise of your visit,î explained Monsieur Defarge.ìLeave us, good boys; we have business here.î            

The three glided by, and went silently down.            

There appearing to be no other door on that floor, and the keeper of thewine-shop going straight to this one when they were left alone, Mr. Lorry askedhim in a whisper, with a little anger:            

ìDo you make a show of Monsieur Manette?î            

ìI show him, in the way you have seen, to a chosen few.î            

ìIs that well?î            

ìI think it is well.î            

ìWho are the few? How do you choose them?î            

ìI choose them as real men, of my nameóJacques is my nameóto whom the sight islikely to do good. Enough; you are English; that is another thing. Stay there,if you please, a little moment.î            

With an admonitory gesture to keep them back, he stooped, and looked inthrough the crevice in the wall. Soon raising his head again, he struck twice orthrice upon the dooróevidently with no other object than to make a noise there.With the same intention, he drew the key across it, three or four times, beforehe put it clumsily into the lock, and turned it as heavily as he could.            

The door slowly opened inward under his hand, and he looked into the room andsaid something. A faint voice answered something. Little more than a singlesyllable could have been spoken on either side.            

He looked back over his shoulder, and beckoned them to enter. Mr. Lorry gothis arm securely round the daughterís waist, and held her; for he felt that shewas sinking.            

ìA-a-a-business, business!î he urged, with a moisture that was not of businessshining on his cheek. ìCome in, come in!î            

ìI am afraid of it,î she answered, shuddering.            

ìOf it? What?î            

ìI mean of him. Of my father.î            

Rendered in a manner desperate, by her state and by the beckoning of theirconductor, he drew over his neck the arm that shook upon his shoulder, liftedher a little, and hurried her into the room. He sat her down just within thedoor, and held her, clinging to him.            

Defarge drew out the key, closed the door, locked it on the inside, took outthe key again, and held it in his hand. All this he did, methodically, and withas loud and harsh an accompaniment of noise as he could make. Finally, he walkedacross the room with a measured tread to where the window was. He stopped there,and faced round.            

The garret, built to be a depository for firewood and the like, was dim anddark: for, the window of dormer shape, was in truth a door in the roof, with alittle crane over it for the hoisting up of stores from the street: unglazed,and closing up the middle in two pieces, like any other door of Frenchconstruction. To exclude the cold, one half of this door was fast closed, andthe other was opened but a very little way. Such a scanty portion of light wasadmitted through these means, that it was difficult, on first coming in, to seeanything; and long habit alone could have slowly formed in any one, the abilityto do any work requiring nicety in such obscurity. Yet, work of that kind wasbeing done in the garret; for, with his back towards the door, and his facetowards the window where the keeper of the wine-shop stood looking at him, awhite-haired man sat on a low bench, stooping forward and very busy, makingshoes.            

ìGood day!î said Monsieur Defarge, looking down at the white head that bentlow over the shoemaking.            

It was raised for a moment, and a very faint voice responded to thesalutation, as if it were at a distance:            

ìGood day!î            

ìYou are still hard at work, I see?î            

After a long silence, the head was lifted for another moment, and the voicereplied, ìYesóI am working.î This time, a pair of haggard eyes had looked at thequestioner, before the face had dropped again.            

The faintness of the voice was pitiable and dreadful. It was not the faintnessof physical weakness, though confinement and hard fare no doubt had their partin it. Its deplorable peculiarity was, that it was the faintness of solitude anddisuse. It was like the last feeble echo of a sound made long and long ago. Soentirely had it lost the life and resonance of the human voice, that it affectedthe senses like a once beautiful color faded away into a poor weak stain. Sosunken and suppressed it was, that it was like a voice underground. Soexpressive it was, of a hopeless and lost creature, that a famished traveler,wearied out by lonely wandering in a wilderness, would have remembered home andfriends in such a tone before lying down to die.            

Some minutes of silent work had passed: and the haggard eyes had looked upagain: not with any interest or curiosity, but with a dull mechanicalperception, beforehand, that the spot where the only visitor they were aware ofhad stood, was not yet empty.            

ìI want,î said Defarge, who had not removed his gaze from the shoemaker, ìtolet in a little more light here. You can bear a little more?î            

The shoemaker stopped his work; looked with a vacant air of listening, at thefloor on one side of him; then similarly, at the floor on the other side of him;then, upward at the speaker.            

ìWhat did you say?î            

ìYou can bear a little more light?î            

ìI must bear it, if you let it in.î (Laying the palest shadow of a stress uponthe second word.)            

The opened half-door was opened a little further, and secured at that anglefor the time. A broad ray of light fell into the garret, and showed the workmanwith an unfinished shoe upon his lap, pausing in his labour. His few commontools and various scraps of leather were at his feet and on his bench. He had awhite beard, raggedly cut, but not very long, a hollow face, and exceedinglybright eyes. The hollowness and thinness of his face would have caused them tolook large, under his yet dark eyebrows and his confused white hair, though theyhad been really otherwise; but, they were naturally large, and lookedunnaturally so. His yellow rags of shirt lay open at the throat, and showed hisbody to be withered and worn. He, and his old canvas frock, and his loosestockings, and all his poor tatters of clothes, had, in a long seclusion fromdirect light and air, faded down to such a dull uniformity of parchment-yellow,that it would have been hard to say which was which.            

He had put up a hand between his eyes and the light, and the very bones of itseemed transparent. So he sat, with a steadfastly vacant gaze, pausing in hiswork. He never looked at the figure before him, without first looking down onthis side of himself, then on that, as if he had lost the habit of associatingplace with sound; he never spoke, without first wandering in this manner, andforgetting to speak.            

ìAre you going to finish that pair of shoes to-day?î asked Defarge, motioningto Mr. Lorry to come forward.            

ìWhat did you say?î            

ìDo you mean to finish that pair of shoes to-day?î            

ìI canít say that I mean to. I suppose so. I donít know.î            

But, the question reminded him of his work, and he bent over it again.            

Mr. Lorry came silently forward, leaving the daughter by the door. When he hadstood, for a minute or two, by the side of Defarge, the shoemaker looked up. Heshowed no surprise at seeing another figure, but the unsteady fingers of one ofhis hands strayed to his lips as he looked at it (his lips and his nails were ofthe same pale lead-colour), and then the hand dropped to his work, and he oncemore bent over the shoe. The look and the action had occupied but aninstant.            

ìYou have a visitor, you see,î said Monsieur Defarge.            

ìWhat did you say?î            

ìHere is a visitor.î            

The shoemaker looked up as before, but without removing a hand from hiswork.            

ìCome!î said Defarge. ìHere is monsieur, who knows a well-made shoe when hesees one. Show him that shoe you are working at. Take it, monsieur.î            

Mr. Lorry took it in his hand.            

ìTell monsieur what kind of shoe it is, and the makerís name.î            

There was a longer pause than usual, before the shoemaker replied:            

ìI forget what it was you asked me. What did you say?î            

ìI said, couldnít you describe the kind of shoe, for monsieurísinformation?î            

ìIt is a ladyís shoe. It is a young ladyís walking-shoe. It is in the presentmode. I never saw the mode. I have had a pattern in my hand.î He glanced at theshoe with some little passing touch of pride.            

ìAnd the makerís name?î said Defarge.            

Now that he had no work to hold, he laid the knuckles of the right hand in thehollow of the left, and then the knuckles of the left hand in the hollow of theright, and then passed a hand across his bearded chin, and so on in regularchanges, without a momentís intermission. The task of recalling him from thevagrancy into which he always sank when he had spoken, was like recalling somevery weak person from a swoon, or endeavouring, in the hope of some disclosure,to stay the spirit of a fast-dying man.            

ìDid you ask me for my name?î            

ìAssuredly I did.î            

ìOne Hundred and Five, North Tower.î            

ìIs that all?î            

ìOne Hundred and Five, North Tower.î            

With a weary sound that was not a sigh, nor a groan, he bent to work again,until the silence was again broken.            

ìYou are not a shoemaker by trade?î said Mr. Lorry, looking steadfastly athim.            

His haggard eyes turned to Defarge as if he would have transferred thequestion to him: but as no help came from that quarter, they turned back on thequestioner when they had sought the ground.            

ìI am not a shoemaker by trade? No, I was not a shoemaker by trade. I-I learntit here. I taught myself. I asked leave toóî            

He lapsed away, even for minutes, ringing those measured changes on his handsthe whole time. His eyes came slowly back, at last, to the face from which theyhad wandered; when they rested on it, he started, and resumed, in the manner ofa sleeper that moment awake, reverting to a subject of last night.            

ìI asked leave to teach myself, and I got it with much difficulty after a longwhile, and I have made shoes ever since.î            

As he held out his hand for the shoe that had been taken from him, Mr. Lorrysaid, still looking steadfastly in his face:            

ìMonsieur Manette, do you remember nothing of me?î            

The shoe dropped to the ground, and he sat looking fixedly at thequestioner.            

ìMonsieur Manetteî; Mr. Lorry laid his hand upon Defargeís arm; ìdo youremember nothing of this man? Look at him. Look at me. Is there no old banker,no old business, no old servant, no old time, rising in your mind, MonsieurManette?î            

As the captive of many years sat looking fixedly, by turns, at Mr. Lorry andat Defarge, some long obliterated marks of an actively intent intelligence inthe middle of the forehead, gradually forced themselves through the black mistthat had fallen on him. They were overclouded again, they were fainter, theywere gone; but they had been there. And so exactly was the expression repeatedon the fair young face of her who had crept along the wall to a point where shecould see him, and where she now stood looking at him, with hands which at firsthad been only raised in frightened compassion, if not even to keep him off andshut out the sight of him, but which were now extending towards him, tremblingwith eagerness to lay the spectral face upon her warm young breast, and love itback to life and hopeóso exactly was the expression repeated (though in strongercharacters) on her fair young face, that it looked as though it had passed likea moving light, from him to her.            

Darkness had fatten on him in its place. He looked at the two, less and lessattentively, and his eyes in gloomy abstraction sought the ground and lookedabout him in the old way. Finally, with a deep long sigh, he took the shoe up,and resumed his work.            

ìHave you recognised him, monsieur?î asked Defarge in a whisper.            

ìYes; for a moment. At first I thought it quite hopeless, but I haveunquestionably seen, for a single moment, the face that I once knew so well.Hush! Let us draw further back. Hush!î            

She had moved from the wall of the garret, very near to the bench on which hesat. There was something awful in his unconsciousness of the figure that couldhave put out its hand and touched him as he stooped over his labour.            

Not a word was spoken, not a sound was made. She stood, like a spirit, besidehim, and he bent over his work.            

It happened, at length, that he had occasion to change the instrument in hishand, for his shoemakerís knife. It lay on that side of him which was not theside on which she stood. He had taken it up, and was stooping to work again,when his eyes caught the skirt of her dress. He raised them, and saw her face.The two spectators started forward, but she stayed them with a motion of herhand. She had no fear of his striking at her with the knife, though theyhad.            

He stared at her with a fearful look, and after a while his lips began to formsome words, though no sound proceeded from them. By degrees, in the pauses ofhis quick and laboured breathing, he was heard to say:            

ìWhat is this?î            

With the tears streaming down her face, she put her two hands to her lips, andkissed them to him; then clasped them on her breast, as if she laid his ruinedhead there.            

ìYou are not the gaolerís daughter?î            

She sighed ìNo.î            

ìWho are you?î            

Not yet trusting the tones of her voice, she sat down on the bench beside him.He recoiled, but she laid her hand upon his arm. A strange thrill struck himwhen she did so, and visibly passed over his frame; he laid the knife downísoftly, as he sat staring at her.            

Her golden hair, which she wore in long curls, had been hurriedly pushedaside, and fell down over her neck. Advancing his hand by little and little, hetook it up and looked at it. In the midst of the action he went astray, and,with another deep sigh, fell to work at his shoemaking.            

But not for long. Releasing his arm, she laid her hand upon his shoulder.After looking doubtfully at it, two or three times, as if to be sure that it wasreally there, he laid down his work, put his hand to his neck, and took off ablackened string with a scrap of folded rag attached to it. He opened this,carefully, on his knee, and it contained a very little quantity of hair: notmore than one or two long golden hairs, which he had, in some old day, wound offupon his finger.            

He took her hair into his hand again, and looked closely at it. ìIt is thesame. How can it be! When was it! How was it!î            

As the concentrated expression returned to his forehead, he seemed to becomeconscious that it was in hers too. He turned her full to the light, and lookedat her.            

ìShe had laid her head upon my shoulder, that night when I was summonedoutóshe had a fear of my going, though I had noneóand when I was brought to theNorth Tower they found these upon my sleeve. ëYou will leave me them? They cannever help me to escape in the body, though they may in the spirit.í Those werethe words I said. I remember them very well.î            

He formed this speech with his lips many times before he could utter it. Butwhen he did find spoken words for it, they came to him coherently, thoughslowly.            

ìHow was this?óWAS IT YOU?î            

Once more, the two spectators started, as he turned upon her with a frightfulsuddenness. But she sat perfectly still in his grasp, and only said, in a lowvoice, ìI entreat you, good gentlemen, do not come near us, do not speak, do notmove!î            

ìHark!î he exclaimed. ìWhose voice was that?î            

His hands released her as he uttered this cry, and went up to his white hair,which they tore in a frenzy. It died out, as everything but his shoemaking diddie out of him, and he refolded his little packet and tried to secure it in hisbreast; but he still looked at her, and gloomily shook his head.            

ìNo, no, no; you are too young, too blooming. It canít be. See what theprisoner is. These are not the hands she knew, this is not the face she knew,this is not a voice she ever heard. No, no. She wasóand He wasóbefore the slowyears of the North Toweróages ago. What is your name, my gentle angel?î            

Hailing his softened tone and manner, his daughter fell upon her knees beforehim, with her appealing hands upon his breast.            

ìO, sir, at another time you shall know my name, and who my mother was, andwho my father, and how I never knew their hard, hard history. But I cannot tellyou at this time, and I cannot tell you here. All that I may tell you, here andnow, is, that I pray to you to touch me and to bless me. Kiss me, kiss me! O mydear, my dear!î            

His cold white head mingled with her radiant hair, which warmed and lighted itas though it were the light of Freedom shining on him.            

ìIf you hear in my voiceóI donít know that it is so, but I hope it isóif youhear in my voice any resemblance to a voice that once was sweet music in yourears, weep for it, weep for it! If you touch, in touching my hair, anything thatrecalls a beloved head that lay on your breast when you were young and free,weep for it, weep for it! If, when I hint to you of a Home that is before us,where I will be true to you with all my duty and with all my faithful service, Ibring back the remembrance of a Home long desolate, while your poor heart pinedaway, weep for it, weep for it!î            

She held him closer round the neck, and rocked him on her breast like achild.            

ìIf, when I tell you, dearest dear, that your agony is over, and that I havecome here to take you from it, and that we go to England to be at peace and atrest, I cause you to think of your useful life laid waste, and of our nativeFrance so wicked to you, weep for it, weep for it! And if, when I shall tell youof my name, and of my father who is living, and of my mother who is dead, youlearn that I have to kneel to my honoured father, and implore his pardon forhaving never for his sake striven all day and lain awake and wept all night,because the love of my poor mother hid his torture from me, weep for it, weepfor it! Weep for her, then, and for me! Good gentlemen, thank God! I feel hissacred tears upon my face, and his sobs strike against my heart. O, see! ThankGod for us, thank God!î            

He had sunk in her arms, and his face dropped on her breast: a sight sotouching, yet so terrible in the tremendous wrong and suffering which had gonebefore it, that the two beholders covered their faces.            

When the quiet of the garret had been long undisturbed, and his heaving breastand shaken form had long yielded to the calm that must follow all stormsóemblemto humanity, of the rest and silence into which the storm called Life must hushat lastóthey came forward to raise the father and daughter from the ground. Hehad gradually dropped to the floor, and lay there in a lethargy, worn out. Shehad nestled down with him, that his head might lie upon her arm; and her hairdrooping over him curtained him from the light.            

ìIf, without disturbing him,î she said, raising her hand to Mr. Lorry as hestooped over them, after repeated blowings of his nose, ìall could be arrangedfor our leaving Paris at once, so that, from the, very door, he could be takenawayóî            

ìBut, consider. Is he fit for the journey?î asked Mr. Lorry.            

ìMore fit for that, I think, than to remain in this city, so dreadful tohim.î            

ìIt is true,î said Defarge, who was kneeling to look on and hear. ìMore thanthat; Monsieur Manette is, for all reasons, best out of France. Say, shall Ihire a carriage and post-horses?î            

ìThatís business,î said Mr. Lorry, resuming on the shortest notice hismethodical manners; ìand if business is to be done, I had better do it.î            

ìThen be so kind,î urged Miss Manette, ìas to leave us here. You see howcomposed he has become, and you cannot be afraid to leave him with me now. Whyshould you be? If you will lock the door to secure us from interruption, I donot doubt that you will find him, when you come back, as quiet as you leave him.In any case, I will take care of him until you return, and then we will removehim straight.î            

Both Mr. Lorry and Defarge were rather disinclined to this course, and infavour of one of them remaining. But, as there were not only carriage and horsesto be seen to, but travelling papers; and as time pressed, for the day wasdrawing to an end, it came at last to their hastily dividing the business thatwas necessary to be done, and hurrying away to do it.            

Then, as the darkness closed in, the daughter laid her head down on the hardground close at the fatherís side, and watched him. The darkness deepened anddeepened, and they both lay quiet, until a light gleamed through the chinks inthe wall.            

Mr. Lorry and Monsieur Defarge had made all ready for the journey, and hadbrought with them, besides travelling cloaks and wrappers, bread and meat, wine,and hot coffee. Monsieur Defarge put this provender, and the lamp he carried, onthe shoemakerís bench (there was nothing else in the garret but a pallet bed),and he and Mr. Lorry roused the captive, and assisted him to his feet.            

No human intelligence could have read the mysteries of his mind, in the scaredblank wonder of his face. Whether he knew what had happened, whether herecollected what they had said to him, whether he knew that he was free, werequestions which no sagacity could have solved. They tried speaking to him; but,he was so confused, and so very slow to answer, that they took fright at hisbewilderment, and agreed for the time to tamper with him no more. He had a wild,lost manner of occasionally clasping his head in his hands, that had not beenseen in him before; yet, he had some pleasure in the mere sound of hisdaughterís voice, and invariably turned to it when she spoke.            

In the submissive way of one long accustomed to obey under coercion, he ateand drank what they gave him to eat and drink, and put on the cloak and otherwrappings, that they gave him to wear. He readily responded to his daughterísdrawing her arm through his, and tookóand keptóher hand in both his own.            

They began to descend; Monsieur Defarge going first with the lamp, Mr. Lorryclosing the little procession. They had not traversed many steps of the longmain staircase when he stopped, and stared at the roof and round at thewails.            

ìYou remember the place, my father? You remember coming up here?î            

ìWhat did you say?î            

But, before she could repeat the question, he murmured an answer as if she hadrepeated it.            

ìRemember? No, I donít remember. It was so very long ago.î            

That he had no recollection whatever of his having been brought from hisprison to that house, was apparent to them. They heard him mutter, ìOne Hundredand Five, North Tower;î and when he looked about him, it evidently was for thestrong fortress-walls which had long encompassed him. On their reaching thecourtyard he instinctively altered his tread, as being in expectation of adrawbridge; and when there was no drawbridge, and he saw the carriage waiting inthe open street, he dropped his daughterís hand and clasped his headagain.            

No crowd was about the door; no people were discernible at any of the manywindows; not even a chance passerby was in the street. An unnatural silence anddesertion reigned there. Only one soul was to be seen, and that was MadameDefargeówho leaned against the door-post, knitting, and saw nothing.            

The prisoner had got into a coach, and his daughter had followed him, when Mr.Lorryís feet were arrested on the step by his asking, miserably, for hisshoemaking tools and the unfinished shoes. Madame Defarge immediately called toher husband that she would get them, and went, knitting, out of the lamplight,through the courtyard. She quickly brought them down and handed them in;óandimmediately afterwards leaned against the door-post, knitting, and sawnothing.            

Defarge got upon the box, and gave the word ìTo the Barrier!î The postilioncracked his whip, and they clattered away under the feeble over-swinginglamps.            

Under the over-swinging lamps--swinging ever brighter in the better streets,and ever dimmer in the worseóand by lighted shops, gay crowds, illuminatedcoffee-houses, and theatre-doors, to one of the city gates. Soldiers withlanterns, at the guard-house there. ìYour papers, travellers!î ìSee here then,Monsieur the Officer,î said Defarge, getting down, and taking him gravely apart,ìthese are the papers of monsieur inside, with the white head. They wereconsigned to me, with him, at theóî He dropped his voice, there was a flutteramong the military lanterns, and one of them being handed into the coach by anarm in uniform, the eyes connected with the arm looked, not an every day or anevery night look, at monsieur with the white head. ìIt is well. Forward!î fromthe uniform. ìAdieu!î from Defarge. And so, under a short grove of feebler andfeebler over-swinging lamps, out under the great grove of stars.            

Beneath that arch of unmoved and eternal lights; some, so remote from thislittle earth that the learned tell us it is doubtful whether their rays haveeven yet discovered it, as a point in space where anything is suffered or done:the shadows of the night were broad and black. All through the cold and restlessinterval, until dawn, they once more whispered in the ears of Mr. JarvisLorryósitting opposite the buried man who had been dug out, and wondering whatsubtle powers were for ever lost to him, and what were capable ofrestorationóthe old inquiry:            

ìI hope you care to be recalled to life?î            

And the old answer:            

ìI canít say.î            

The end of the first book.            

Tellsonís Bank by Temple Bar was an old-fashioned place, even in the year onethousand seven hundred and eighty. It was very small, very dark, very ugly, veryincommodious. It was an old-fashioned place, moreover, in the moral attributethat the partners in the House were proud of its smallness, proud of itsdarkness, proud of its ugliness, proud of its incommodiousness. They were evenboastful of its eminence in those particulars, and were fired by an expressconviction that, if it were less objectionable, it would be less respectable.This was no passive belief, but an active weapon which they flashed at moreconvenient places of business. Tellsonís (they said) wanted no elbow-room,Tellsonís wanted no light, Tellsonís wanted no embellishment. Noakes and Co.ísmight, or Snooks Brothersí might; but Tellsonís, thank Heaven!ó            

Any one of these partners would have disinherited his son on the question ofrebuilding Tellsonís. In this respect the House was much on a par with theCountry; which did very often disinherit its sons for suggesting improvements inlaws and customs that had long been highly objectionable, but were only the morerespectable.            

Thus it had come to pass, that Tellsonís was the triumphant perfection ofinconvenience. After bursting open a door of idiotic obstinacy with a weakrattle in its throat, you fell into Tellsonís down two steps, and came to yoursenses in a miserable little shop, with two little counters, where the oldest ofmen made your cheque shake as if the wind rustled it, while they examined thesignature by the dingiest of windows, which were always under a shower-bath ofmud from Fleet-street, and which were made the dingier by their own iron barsproper, and the heavy shadow of Temple Bar. If your business necessitated yourseeing ìthe House,î you were put into a species of Condemned Hold at the back,where you meditated on a misspent life, until the House came with its bands inits pockets, and you could hardly blink at it in the dismal twilight. Your moneycame out of, or went into, wormy old wooden drawers, particles of which flew upyour nose and down your throat when they were opened and shut. Your bank-noteshad a musty odour, as if they were fast decomposing into rags again. Your platewas stowed away among the neighbouring cesspools, and evil communicationscorrupted its good polish in a day or two. Your deeds got into extemporisedstrong-rooms made of kitchens and sculleries, and fretted all the fat out oftheir parchments into the banking-house air. Your lighter boxes of family paperswent up-stairs into a Barmecide room, that always had a great dining-table in itand never had a dinner, and where, even in the year one thousand seven hundredand eighty, the first letters written to you by your old love, or by your littlechildren, were but newly released from the horror of being ogled through thewindows, by the heads exposed on Temple Bar with an insensate brutality andferocity worthy of Abyssinia or Ashantee.            

But indeed, at that time, putting to death was a recipe much in vogue with alltrades and professions, and not least of all with Tellsonís. Death is Natureísremedy for all things, and why not Legislationís? Accordingly, the forger wasput to Death; the utterer of a bad note was put to Death; the unlawful opener ofa letter was put to Death; the purloiner of forty shillings and sixpence was putto Death; the holder of a horse at Tellsonís door, who made off with it, was putto Death; the coiner of a bad shilling was put to Death; the sounders ofthree-fourths of the notes in the whole gamut of Crime, were put to Death. Notthat it did the least good in the way of preventionóit might almost have beenworth remarking that the fact was exactly the reverseóbut, it cleared off (as tothis world) the trouble of each particular case, and left nothing else connectedwith it to be looked after. Thus, Tellsonís, in its day, like greater places ofbusiness, its contemporaries, had taken so many lives, that, if the heads laidlow before it had been ranged on Temple Bar instead of being privately disposedof, they would probably have excluded what little light the ground floor bad, ina rather significant manner.            

Cramped in all kinds of dun cupboards and hutches at Tellsonís, the oldest ofmen carried on the business gravely. When they took a young man into TellsonísLondon house, they hid him somewhere till he was old. They kept him in a darkplace, like a cheese, until he had the full Tellson flavour and blue-mould uponhim. Then only was he permitted to be seen, spectacularly poring over largebooks, and casting his breeches and gaiters into the general weight of theestablishment.            

Outside Tellsonísónever by any means in it, unless called inówas anodd-job-man, an occasional porter and messenger, who served as the live sign ofthe house. He was never absent during business hours, unless upon an errand, andthen he was represented by his son: a grisly urchin of twelve, who was hisexpress image. People understood that Tellsonís, in a stately way, tolerated theodd-job-man. The house had always tolerated some person in that capacity, andtime and tide had drifted this person to the post. His surname was Cruncher, andon the youthful occasion of his renouncing by proxy the works of darkness, inthe easterly parish church of Hounsditch, he had received the added appellationof Jerry.            

The scene was Mr. Cruncherís private lodging in Hanging-sword-alley,Whitefriars: the time, half-past seven of the clock on a windy March morning,Anno Domini seventeen hundred and eighty. (Mr. Cruncher himself always spoke ofthe year of our Lord as Anna Dominoes: apparently under the impression that theChristian era dated from the invention of a popular game, by a lady who hadbestowed her name upon it.)            

Mr. Cruncherís apartments were not in a savoury neighbourhood, and were buttwo in number, even if a closet with a single pane of glass in it might becounted as one. But they were very decently kept. Early as it was, on the windyMarch morning, the room in which he lay abed was already scrubbed throughout;and between the cups and saucers arranged for breakfast, and the lumbering dealtable, a very clean white cloth was spread.            

Mr. Cruncher reposed under a patchwork counterpane, like a Harlequin at home.At fast, he slept heavily, but, by degrees, began to roll and surge in bed,until he rose above the surface, with his spiky hair looking as if it must tearthe sheets to ribbons. At which juncture, he exclaimed, in a voice of direexasperation:            

ìBust me, if she ainít at it agin!î            

A woman of orderly and industrious appearance rose from her knees in a corner,with sufficient haste and trepidation to show that she was the person referredto.            

ìWhat!î said Mr. Cruncher, looking out of bed for a boot. ìYouíre at it agin,are you?î            

After hailing the mom with this second salutation, he threw a boot at thewoman as a third. It was a very muddy boot, and may introduce the oddcircumstance connected with Mr. Cruncherís domestic economy, that, whereas heoften came home after banking hours with clean boots, he often got up nextmorning to find the same boots covered with clay.            

ìWhat,î said Mr. Cruncher, varying his apostrophe after missing his markóîwhatare you up to, Aggerawayter?î            

ìI was only saying my prayers.î            

ìSaying your prayers! Youíre a nice woman! What do you mean by floppingyourself down and praying agin me?î            

ìI was not praying against you; I was praying for you.î            

ìYou werenít. And if you were, I wonít be took the liberty with. Here! yourmotherís a nice woman, young Jerry, going a praying agin your fatherísprosperity. Youíve got a dutiful mother, you have, my son. Youíve got areligious mother, you have, my boy: going and flopping herself down, and prayingthat the bread-and-butter may be snatched out of the mouth of her onlychild.î            

Master Cruncher (who was in his shirt) took this very ill, and, turning to hismother, strongly deprecated any praying away of his personal board.            

ìAnd what do you suppose, you conceited female,î said Mr. Cruncher, withunconscious inconsistency, ìthat the worth of YOUR prayers may be? Name theprice that you put YOUR prayers at!î            

ìThey only come from the heart, Jerry. They are worth no more thanthat.î            

ìWorth no more than that,î repeated Mr. Cruncher. ìThey ainít worth much,then. Whether or no, I wonít be prayed agin, I tell you. I canít afford it. Iímnot a going to be made unlucky by YOUR sneaking. If you must go floppingyourself down, flop in favour of your husband and child, and not in oppositionto ëem. If I had had any but a unnatíral wife, and this poor boy had had any buta unnatíral mother, I might have made some money last week instead of beingcounter-prayed and countermined and religiously circumwented into the worst ofluck. B-u-u-ust me!î said Mr. Cruncher, who all this time had been putting onhis clothes, ìif I ainít, what with piety and one blowed thing and another, beenchoused this last week into as bad luck as ever a poor devil of a honesttradesman met with! Young Jerry, dress yourself, my boy, and while I clean myboots keep a eye upon your mother now and then, and if you see any signs of moreflopping, give me a call. For, I tell you,î here he addressed his wife oncemore, ìI wonít be gone agin, in this manner. I am as rickety as a hackney-coach,Iím as sleepy as laudanum, my lines is strained to that degree that I shouldnítknow, if it wasnít for the pain in ëem, which was me and which somebody else,yet Iím none the better for it in pocket; and itís my suspicion that youíve beenat it from morning to night to prevent me from being the better for it inpocket, and I wonít put up with it, Aggerawayter, and what do you saynow!î            

Growling, in addition, such phrases as ìAh! yes! Youíre religious, too. Youwouldnít put yourself in opposition to the interests of your husband and child,would you? Not you!î and throwing off other sarcastic sparks from the whirlinggrindstone of his indignation, Mr. Cruncher betook himself to his boot-cleaningand his general preparation for business. In the meantime, his son, whose headwas garnished with tenderer spikes, and whose young eyes stood close by oneanother, as his fatherís did, kept the required watch upon his mother. Hegreatly disturbed that poor woman at intervals, by darting out of his sleepingcloset, where he made his toilet, with a suppressed cry of ìYou are going toflop, mother. óHalloa, father!î and, after raising this fictitious alarm,darting in again with an undutiful grin.            

Mr. Cruncherís temper was not at all improved when he came to his breakfast.He resented Mrs. Cruncherís saying grace with particular animosity.            

ìNow, Aggerawayter! What are you up to? At it again?î            

His wife explained that she had merely ìasked a blessing.î            

ìDonít do it!î said Mr. Cruncher looking about, as if he rather expected tosee the loaf disappear under the efficacy of his wifeís petitions. ìI ainít agoing to be blest out of house and home. I wonít have my wittles blest off mytable. Keep still!î            

Exceedingly red-eyed and grim, as if he had been up all night at a party whichhad taken anything but a convivial turn, Jerry Cruncher worried his breakfastrather than ate it, growling over it like any four-footed inmate of a menagerie.Towards nine oíclock he smoothed his ruffled aspect, and, presenting asrespectable and business-like an exterior as he could overlay his natural selfwith, issued forth to the occupation of the day.            

It could scarcely be called a trade, in spite of his favourite description ofhimself as ìa honest tradesman.î His stock consisted of a wooden stool, made outof a broken-backed chair cut down, which stool, young Jerry, walking at hisfatherís side, carried every morning to beneath the banking-house window thatwas nearest Temple Bar: where, with the addition of the first handful of strawthat could be gleaned from any passing vehicle to keep the cold and wet from theodd-job-manís feet, it formed the encampment for the day. On this post of his,Mr. Cruncher was as well known to Fleet-street and the Temple, as the Baritself,óand was almost as in-looking.            

Encamped at a quarter before nine, in good time to touch his three- corneredhat to the oldest of men as they passed in to Tellsonís, Jerry took up hisstation on this windy March morning, with young Jerry standing by him, when notengaged in making forays through the Bar, to inflict bodily and mental injuriesof an acute description on passing boys who were small enough for his amiablepurpose. Father and son, extremely like each other, looking silently on at themorning traffic in Fleet-street, with their two heads as near to one another asthe two eyes of each were, bore a considerable resemblance to a pair of monkeys.The resemblance was not lessened by the accidental circumstance, that the matureJerry bit and spat out straw, while the twinkling eyes of the youthful Jerrywere as restlessly watchful of him as of everything else in Fleet-street.            

The head of one of the regular indoor messengers attached to Tellsonísestablishment was put through the door, and the word was given:            

ìPorter wanted!î            

ìHooray, father! Hereís an early job to begin with!î            

Having thus given his parent God speed, young Jerry seated himself on thestool, entered on his reversionary interest in the straw his father had beenchewing, and cogitated.            

ìAl-ways rusty! His fingers is al-ways rusty!î muttered young Jerry. ìWheredoes my father get all that iron rust from? He donít get no iron rusthere!î            

ìYou know the Old Bailey, well, no doubt?î said one of the oldest of clerks toJerry the messenger.            

ìYe-es, sir,î returned Jerry, in something of a dogged manner. ìI DO know theBailey.î            

ìJust so. And you know Mr. Lorry.î            

ìI know Mr. Lorry, sir, much better than I know the Bailey. Much better,î saidJerry, not unlike a reluctant witness at the establishment in question, ìthan I,as a honest tradesman, wish to know the Bailey.î            

ìVery well. Find the door where the witnesses go in, and show the door-keeperthis note for Mr. Lorry. He will then let you in.î            

ìInto the court, sir?î            

ìInto the court.î            

Mr. Cruncherís eyes seemed to get a little closer to one another, and tointerchange the inquiry, ìWhat do you think of this?î            

ìAm I to wait in the court, sir?î he asked, as the result of thatconference.            

ìI am going to tell you. The door-keeper will pass the note to Mr. Lorry, anddo you make any gesture that will attract Mr. Lorryís attention, and show himwhere you stand. Then what you have to do, is, to remain there until he wantsyou.î            

ìIs that all, sir?î            

ìThatís all. He wishes to have a messenger at hand. This is to tell him youare there.î            

As the ancient clerk deliberately folded and superscribed the note, Mr.Cruncher, after surveying him in silence until he came to the blotting-paperstage, remarked:            

ìI suppose theyíll be trying Forgeries this morning?î            

ìTreason!î            

ìThatís quartering,î said Jerry. ìBarbarous!î            

ìIt is the law,î remarked the ancient clerk, turning his surprised spectaclesupon him. ìIt is the law.î            

ìItís hard in the law to spile a man, I think. Ifs hard enough to kill him,but itís wery hard to spile him, sir.î            

ìNot at all,î retained the ancient clerk. ìSpeak well of the law. Take care ofyour chest and voice, my good friend, and leave the law to take care of itself.I give you that advice.î            

ìItís the damp, sir, what settles on my chest and voice,î said Jerry. ìI leaveyou to judge what a damp way of earning a living mine is.î            

ìWell, well,î said the old clerk; ìwe all have our various ways of gaining alivelihood. Some of us have damp ways, and some of us have dry ways. Here is theletter. Go along.î            

Jerry took the letter, and, remarking to himself with less internal deferencethan he made an outward show of, ìYou are a lean old one, too,î made his bow,informed his son, in passing, of his destination, and went his way.            

They hanged at Tyburn, in those days, so the street outside Newgate had notobtained one infamous notoriety that has since attached to it. But, the gaol wasa vile place, in which most kinds of debauchery and villainy were practised, andwhere dire diseases were bred, that came into court with the prisoners, andsometimes rushed straight from the dock at my Lord Chief Justice himself, andpulled him off the bench. It had more than once happened, that the Judge in theblack cap pronounced his own doom as certainly as the prisonerís, and even diedbefore him. For the rest, the Old Bailey was famous as a kind of deadlyinn-yard, from which pale travellers set out continually, in carts and coaches,on a violent passage into the other world: traversing some two miles and a halfof public street and road, and shaming few good citizens, if any. So powerful isuse, and so desirable to be good use in the beginning. It was famous, too, forthe pillory, a wise old institution, that inflicted a punishment of which no onecould foresee the extent; also, for the whipping-post, another dear oldinstitution, very humanising and softening to behold in action; also, forextensive transactions in blood-money, another fragment of ancestral wisdom,systematically leading to the most frightful mercenary crimes that could becommitted under Heaven. Altogether, the Old Bailey, at that date, was a choiceillustration of the precept, that ìWhatever is is right;î an aphorism that wouldbe as final as it is lazy, did it not include the troublesome consequence, thatnothing that ever was, was wrong.            

Making his way through the tainted crowd, dispersed up and down this hideousscene of action, with the skill of a man accustomed to make his way quietly, themessenger found out the door he sought, and handed in his letter through a trapin it. For, people then paid to see the play at the Old Bailey, just as theypaid to see the play in Bedlam--only the former entertainment was much thedearer. Therefore, all the Old Bailey doors were well guarded--except, indeed,the social doors by which the criminals got there, and those were always leftwide open.            

After some delay and demur, the door grudgingly turned on its hinges a verylittle way, and allowed Mr. Jerry Cruncher to squeeze himself into court.            

ìWhatís on?î he asked, in a whisper, of the man he found himself nextto.            

ìNothing yet.î            

ìWhatís coming on?î            

ìThe Treason case.î            

ìThe quartering one, eh?î            

ìAh!î returned the man, with a relish; ìheíll be drawn on a hurdle to be halfhanged, and then heíll be taken down and sliced before his own face, and thenhis inside will be taken out and burnt while he looks on, and then his head willbe chopped off, and heíll be cut into quarters. Thatís the sentence.î            

ìIf heís found Guilty, you mean to say?î Jerry added, by way ofproviso.            

ìOh! theyíll find him guilty,î said the other. ìDonít you be afraid ofthat.î            

Mr. Cruncherís attention was here diverted to the door-keeper, whom he sawmaking his way to Mr. Lorry, with the note in his hand. Mr. Lorry sat at atable, among the gentlemen in wigs: not far from a wigged gentleman, theprisonerís counsel, who had a great bundle of papers before him: and nearlyopposite another wigged gentleman with his hands in his pockets, whose wholeattention, when Mr. Cruncher looked at him then or afterwards, seemed to beconcentrated on the ceiling of the court. After some gruff coughing and rubbingof his chin and signing with his hand, Jerry attracted the notice of Mr. Lorry,who had stood up to look for him, and who quietly nodded and sat downagain.            

ìWhatís HE got to do with the case?î asked the man he had spoken with.            

ìBlest if I know,î said Jerry.            

ìWhat have YOU got to do with it, then, if a person may inquire?î            

ìBlest if I know that either,î said Jerry.            

The entrance of the Judge, and a consequent great stir and settling down inthe court, stopped the dialogue. Presently, the dock became the central point ofinterest. Two gaolers, who had been standing there, wont out, and the prisonerwas brought in, and put to the bar.            

Everybody present, except the one wigged gentleman who looked at the ceiling,stared at him. All the human breath in the place, rolled at him, like a sea, ora wind, or a fire. Eager faces strained round pillars and corners, to get asight of him; spectators in back rows stood up, not to miss a hair of him;people on the floor of the court, laid their hands on the shoulders of thepeople before them, to help themselves, at anybodyís cost, to a view ofhim--stood a-tiptoe, got upon ledges, stood upon next to nothing, to see everyinch of him. Conspicuous among these latter, like an animated bit of the spikedwall of Newgate, Jerry stood: aiming at the prisoner the beery breath of a whethe had taken as he came along, and discharging it to mingle with the waves ofother beer, and gin, and tea, and coffee, and what not, that flowed at him, andalready broke upon the great windows behind him in an impure mist andrain.            

The object of all this staring and blaring, was a young man of aboutfive-and-twenty, well-grown and well-looking, with a sunburnt cheek and a darkeye. His condition was that of a young gentleman. He was plainly dressed inblack, or very dark grey, and his hair, which was long and dark, was gathered ina ribbon at the back of his neck; more to be out of his way than for ornament.As an emotion of the mind will express itself through any covering of the body,so the paleness which his situation engendered came through the brown upon hischeek, showing the soul to be stronger than the sun. He was otherwise quiteself-possessed, bowed to the Judge, and stood quiet.            

The sort of interest with which this man was stared and breathed at, was not asort that elevated humanity. Had he stood in peril of a less horriblesentence--had there been a chance of any one of its savage details beingspared--by just so much would he have lost in his fascination. The form that wasto be doomed to be so shamefully mangled, was the sight; the immortal creaturethat was to be so butchered and torn asunder, yielded the sensation. Whatevergloss the various spectators put upon the interest, according to their severalarts and powers of self-deceit, the interest was, at the root of it,Ogreish.            

Silence in the court! Charles Darnay had yesterday pleaded Not Guilty to anindictment denouncing him (with infinite jingle and jangle) for that he was afalse traitor to our serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth, prince, ourLord the King, by reason of his having, on divers occasions, and by divers meansand ways, assisted Lewis, the French King, in his wars against our said serene,illustrious, excellent, and so forth; that was to say, by coming and going,between the dominions of our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth,and those of the said French Lewis, and wickedly, falsely, traitorously, andotherwise evil-adverbiously, revealing to the said French Lewis what forces oursaid serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth, had in preparation to send toCanada and North America. This much, Jerry, with his head becoming more and morespiky as the law terms bristled it, made out with huge satisfaction, and soarrived circuitously at the understanding that the aforesaid, and over and overagain aforesaid, Charles Darnay, stood there before him upon his trial; that thejury were swearing in; and that Mr. Attorney-General was making ready tospeak.            

The accused, who was (and who knew he was) being mentally hanged, beheaded,and quartered, by everybody there, neither flinched from the situation, norassumed any theatrical air in it. He was quiet and attentive; watched theopening proceedings with a grave interest; and stood with his hands resting onthe slab of wood before him, so composedly, that they had not displaced a leafof the herbs with which it was strewn. The court was all bestrewn with herbs andsprinkled with vinegar, as a precaution against gaol air and gaol fever.            

Over the prisonerís head there was a mirror, to throw the light down upon him.Crowds of the wicked and the wretched had been reflected in it, and had passedfrom its surface and this earthís together. Haunted in a most ghastly mannerthat abominable place would have been, if the glass could ever have renderedback its reflections, as the ocean is one day to give up its dead. Some passingthought of the infamy and disgrace for which it had been reserved, may havestruck the prisonerís mind. Be that as it may, a change in his position makinghim conscious of a bar of light across his face, he looked up; and when he sawthe glass his face flushed, and his right hand pushed the herbs away.            

It happened, that the action turned his face to that side of the court whichwas on his left. About on a level with his eyes, there sat, in that corner ofthe Judgeís bench, two persons upon whom his look immediately rested; soimmediately, and so much to the changing of his aspect, that all the eyes thatwere tamed upon him, turned to them.            

The spectators saw in the two figures, a young lady of little more thantwenty, and a gentleman who was evidently her father; a man of a very remarkableappearance in respect of the absolute whiteness of his hair, and a certainindescribable intensity of face: not of an active kind, but pondering andself-communing. When this expression was upon him, he looked as if he were old;but when it was stirred and broken up--as it was now, in a moment, on hisspeaking to his daughter--he became a handsome man, not past the prime oflife.            

His daughter had one of her hands drawn through his arm, as she sat by him,and the other pressed upon it. She had drawn close to him, in her dread of thescene, and in her pity for the prisoner. Her forehead had been strikinglyexpressive of an engrossing terror and compassion that saw nothing but the perilof the accused. This had been so very noticeable, so very powerfully andnaturally shown, that starers who had had no pity for him were touched by her;and the whisper went about, ìWho are they?î            

Jerry, the messenger, who had made his own observations, in his own manner,and who had been sucking the rust off his fingers in his absorption, stretchedhis neck to hear who they were. The crowd about him had pressed and passed theinquiry on to the nearest attendant, and from him it had been more slowlypressed and passed back; at last it got to Jerry:            

ìWitnesses.î            

ìFor which side?î            

ìAgainst.î            

ìAgainst what side?î            

ìThe prisonerís.î            

The Judge, whose eyes had gone in the general direction, recalled them, leanedback in his seat, and looked steadily at the man whose life was in his hand, asMr. Attorney-General rose to spin the rope, grind the axe, and hammer the nailsinto the scaffold.            

Mr. Attorney-General had to inform the jury, that the prisoner before them,though young in years, was old in the treasonable practices which claimed theforfeit of his life. That this correspondence with the public enemy was not acorrespondence of to-day, or of yesterday, or even of last year, or of the yearbefore. That, it was certain the prisoner had, for longer than that, been in thehabit of passing and repassing between France and England, on secret business ofwhich he could give no honest account. That, if it were in the nature oftraitorous ways to thrive (which happily it never was), the real wickedness andguilt of his business might have remained undiscovered. That Providence,however, had put it into the heart of a person who was beyond fear and beyondreproach, to ferret out the nature of the prisonerís schemes, and, struck withhorror, to disclose them to his Majestyís Chief Secretary of State and mosthonourable Privy Council. That, this patriot would be produced before them.That, his position and attitude were, on the whole, sublime. That, he had beenthe prisonerís friend, but, at once in an auspicious and an evil hour detectinghis infamy, had resolved to immolate the traitor he could no longer cherish inhis bosom, on the sacred altar of his country. That, if statues were decreed inBritain, as in ancient Greece and Rome, to public benefactors, this shiningcitizen would assuredly have had one. That, as they were not so decreed, heprobably would not have one. That, Virtue, as had been observed by the poets (inmany passages which he well knew the jury would have, word for word, at the tipsof their tongues; whereat the juryís countenances displayed a guiltyconsciousness that they knew nothing about the passages), was in a mannercontagious; more especially the bright virtue known as patriotism, or love ofcountry. That, the lofty example of this immaculate and unimpeachable witnessfor the Crown, to refer to whom however unworthily was an honour, hadcommunicated itself to the prisonerís servant, and had engendered in him a holydetermination to examine his masterís table-drawers and pockets, and secrete hispapers. That, he (Mr. Attorney-General) was prepared to hear some disparagementattempted of this admirable servant; but that, in a general way, he preferredhim to his (Mr. Attorney-Generalís) brothers and sisters, and honoured him morethan his (Mr. Attorney-Generalís) father and mother. That, he called withconfidence on the jury to come and do likewise. That, the evidence of these twowitnesses, coupled with the documents of their discovering that would beproduced, would show the prisoner to have been furnished with lists of hisMajestyís forces, and of their disposition and preparation, both by sea andland, and would leave no doubt that he had habitually conveyed such informationto a hostile power. That, these lists could not be proved to be in theprisonerís handwriting; but that it was all the same; that, indeed, it wasrather the better for the prosecution, as showing the prisoner to be artful inhis precautions. That, the proof would go back five years, and would show theprisoner already engaged in these pernicious missions, within a few weeks beforethe date of the very first action fought between the British troops and theAmericans. That, for these reasons, the jury, being a loyal jury (as he knewthey were), and being a responsible jury (as THEY knew they were), mustpositively find the prisoner Guilty, and make an end of him, whether they likedit or not. That, they never could lay their heads upon their pillows; that, theynever could tolerate the idea of their wives laying their heads upon theirpillows; that, they never could endure the notion of their children laying theirheads upon their pillows; in short, that there never more could be, for them ortheirs, any laying of heads upon pillows at all, unless the prisonerís head wastaken off. That head Mr. Attorney-General concluded by demanding of them, in thename of everything he could think of with a round turn in it, and on the faithof his solemn asseveration that he already considered the prisoner as good asdead and gone.             

When the Attorney-General ceased, a buzz arose in the court as if a cloud ofgreat blue-flies were swarming about the prisoner, in anticipation of what hewas soon to become. When toned down again, the unimpeachable patriot appeared inthe witness-box.             

Mr. Solicitor-General then, following his leaderís lead, examined the patriot:John Barsad, gentleman, by name. The story of his pure soul was exactly what Mr.Attorney-General had described it to beóperhaps, if it had a fault, a little tooexactly. Having released his noble bosom of its burden, he would have modestlywithdrawn himself, but that the wigged gentleman with the papers before him,sitting not far from Mr. Lorry, begged to ask him a few questions. The wiggedgentleman sitting opposite, still looking at the ceiling of the court.            

Had he ever been a spy himself? No, he scorned the base insinuation. What didhe live upon? His property. Where was his property? He didnít precisely rememberwhere it was. What was it? No business of anybodyís. Had he inherited it? Yes,he had. From whom? Distant relation. Very distant? Rather. Ever been in prison?Certainly not. Never in a debtorsí prison? Didnít see what that had to do withit. Never in a debtorsí prison?óCome, once again. Never? Yes. How many times?Two or three times. Not five or six? Perhaps. Of what profession? Gentleman.Ever been kicked? Might have been. Frequently? No. Ever kicked downstairs?Decidedly not; once received a kick on the top of a staircase, and felldownstairs of his own accord. Kicked on that occasion for cheating at dice?Something to that effect was said by the intoxicated liar who committed theassault, but it was not true. Swear it was not true? Positively. Ever live bycheating at play? Never. Ever live by play? Not more than other gentlemen do.Ever borrow money of the prisoner? Yes. Ever pay him? No. Was not this intimacywith the prisoner, in reality a very slight one, forced upon the prisoner incoaches, inns, and packets? No. Sure he saw the prisoner with these lists?Certain. Knew no more about the lists? No. Had not procured them himself, forinstance? No. Expect to get anything by this evidence? No. Not in regulargovernment pay and employment, to lay traps? Oh dear no. Or to do anything? Ohdear no. Swear that? Over and over again. No motives but motives of sheerpatriotism? None whatever.            

The virtuous servant, Roger Cly, swore his way through the case at a greatrate. He had taken service with the prisoner, in good faith and simplicity, fouryears ago. He had asked the prisoner, aboard the Calais packet, if he wanted ahandy fellow, and the prisoner had engaged him. He had not asked the prisoner totake the handy fellow as an act of charityónever thought of such a thing. Hebegan to have suspicions of the prisoner, and to keep an eye upon him, soonafterwards. In arranging his clothes, while travelling, he had seen similarlists to these in the prisonerís pockets, over and over again. He had takenthese lists from the drawer of the prisonerís desk. He had not put them therefirst. He had seen the prisoner show these identical lists to French gentlemenat Calais, and similar lists to French gentlemen, both at Calais and Boulogne.He loved his country, and couldnít bear it, and had given information. He hadnever been suspected of stealing a silver tea-pot; he had been malignedrespecting a mustard-pot, but it turned out to be only a plated one. He hadknown the last witness seven or eight years; that was merely a coincidence. Hedidnít call it a particularly curious coincidence; most coincidences werecurious. Neither did he call it a curious coincidence that true patriotism wasHIS only motive too. He was a true Briton, and hoped there were many likehim.            

The blue-flies buzzed again, and Mr. Attorney-General called Mr. JarvisLorry.            

ìMr. Jarvis Lorry, are you a clerk in Tellsonís bank?î            

ìI am.î            

ìOn a certain Friday night in November one thousand seven hundred andseventy-five, did business occasion you to travel between London and Dover bythe mail?î            

ìIt did.î            

ìWere there any other passengers in the mail?î            

ìTwo.î            

ìDid they alight on the road in the course of the night?î            

ìThey did.î            

ìMr. Lorry, look upon the prisoner. Was he one of those twopassengers?î            

ìI cannot undertake to say that he was.î            

ìDoes he resemble either of these two passengers?î            

ìBoth were so wrapped up, and the night was so dark, and we were all soreserved, that I cannot undertake to say even that.î            

ìMr. Lorry, look again upon the prisoner. Supposing him wrapped up as thosetwo passengers were, is there anything in his bulk and stature to render itunlikely that he was one of them?î            

ìNo.î            

ìYou will not swear, Mr. Lorry, that he was not one of them?î            

ìNo.î            

ìSo at least you say he may have been one of them?î            

ìYes. Except that I remember them both to have beenólike myselfótimorous ofhighwaymen, and the prisoner has not a timorous air.î            

ìDid you ever see a counterfeit of timidity, Mr. Lorry?î            

ìI certainly have seen that.î            

ìMr. Lorry, look once more upon the prisoner. Have you seen him, to yourcertain knowledge, before?î            

ìI have.î            

ìWhen?î            

ìI was returning from France a few days afterwards, and, at Calais, theprisoner came on board the packet-ship in which I returned, and made the voyagewith me.î            

ìAt what hour did he come on board?î            

ìAt a little after midnight.î            

ìIn the dead of the night. Was he the only passenger who came on board at thatuntimely hour?î            

ìHe happened to be the only one.î            

ìNever mind about ëhappening,í Mr. Lorry. He was the only passenger who cameon board in the dead of the night?î            

ìHe was.î            

ìWere you travelling alone, Mr. Lorry, or with any companion?î            

ìWith two companions. A gentleman and lady. They are here.î            

ìThey are here. Had you any conversation with the prisoner?î            

ìHardly any. The weather was stormy, and the passage long and rough, and I layon a sofa, almost from shore to shore.î            

ìMiss Manette!î            

The young lady, to whom all eyes had been turned before, and were now turnedagain, stood up where she had sat. Her father rose with her, and kept her handdrawn through his arm.            

ìMiss Manette, look upon the prisoner.î            

To be confronted with such pity, and such earnest youth and beauty, was farmore trying to the accused than to be confronted with all the crowd. Standing,as it were, apart with her on the edge of his grave, not all the staringcuriosity that looked on, could, for the moment, nerve him to remain quitestill. His hurried right hand parcelled out the herbs before him into imaginarybeds of flowers in a garden; and his efforts to control and steady his breathingshook the lips from which the colour rushed to his heart. The buzz of the greatflies was loud again.            

ìMiss Manette, have you seen the prisoner before?î            

ìYes, sir.î            

ìWhere?î            

ìOn board of the packet-ship just now referred to, sir, and on the sameoccasion.î            

ìYou are the young lady just now referred to?î            

ìO! most unhappily, I am!î            

The plaintive tone of her compassion merged into the less musical voice of theJudge, as he said something fiercely: ìAnswer the questions put to you, and makeno remark upon them.î            

ìMiss Manette, had you any conversation with the prisoner on that passageacross the Channel?î            

ìYes, sir.î            

ìRecall it.î            

In the midst of a profound stillness, she faintly began: ìWhen the gentlemancame on boardóî            

ìDo you mean the prisoner?î inquired the Judge, knitting his brows.            

ìYes, my Lord.î            

ìThen say the prisoner.î            

ìWhen the prisoner came on board, he noticed that my father,î turning her eyeslovingly to him as he stood beside her, ìwas much fatigued and in a very weakstate of health. My father was so reduced that I was afraid to take him out ofthe air, and I had made a bed for him on the deck near the cabin steps, and Isat on the deck at his side to take care of him. There were no other passengersthat night, but we four. The prisoner was so good as to beg permission to adviseme how I could shelter my father from the wind and weather, better than I haddone. I had not known how to do it well, not understanding how the wind wouldset when we were out of the harbour. He did it for me. He expressed greatgentleness and kindness for my fatherís state, and I am sure he felt it. Thatwas the manner of our beginning to speak together.î            

ìLet me interrupt you for a moment. Had he come on board alone?î            

ìNo.î            

ìHow many were with him?î            

ìTwo French gentlemen.î            

ìHad they conferred together?î            

ìThey had conferred together until the last moment, when it was necessary forthe French gentlemen to be landed in their boat.î            

ìHad any papers been handed about among them, similar to these lists?î            

ìSome papers had been handed about among them, but I donít know whatpapers.î            

ìLike these in shape and size?î            

ìPossibly, but indeed I donít know, although they stood whispering very nearto me: because they stood at the top of the cabin steps to have the light of thelamp that was hanging there; it was a dull lamp, and they spoke very low, and Idid not hear what they said, and saw only that they looked at papers.î            

ìNow, to the prisonerís conversation, Miss Manette.î            

ìThe prisoner was as open in his confidence with meówhich arose out of myhelpless situationóas he was kind, and good, and useful to my father. I hope,îbursting into tears, ìI may not repay him by doing him harm to-day.î            

Buzzing from the blue-flies.            

ìMiss Manette, if the prisoner does not perfectly understand that you give theevidence which it is your duty to giveówhich you must giveóand which you cannotescape from givingówith great unwillingness, he is the only person present inthat condition. Please to go on.î            

ìHe told me that he was travelling on business of a delicate and difficultnature, which might get people into trouble, and that he was thereforetravelling under an assumed name. He said that this business had, within a fewdays, taken him to France, and might, at intervals, take him backwards andforwards between France and England for a long time to come.î            

ìDid he say anything about America, Miss Manette? Be particular.î            

ìHe tried to explain to me how that quarrel had arisen, and he said that, sofar as he could judge, it was a wrong and foolish one on Englandís part. Headded, in a jesting way, that perhaps George Washington might gain almost asgreat a name in history as George the Third. But there was no harm in his way ofsaying this: it was said laughingly, and to beguile the time.î            

Any strongly marked expression of face on the part of a chief actor in a sceneof great interest to whom many eyes are directed, will be unconsciously imitatedby the spectators. Her forehead was painfully anxious and intent as she gavethis evidence, and, in the pauses when she stopped for the Judge to write itdown, watched its effect upon the counsel for and against. Among the lookers-onthere was the same expression in all quarters of the court; insomuch, that agreat majority of the foreheads there, might have been mirrors reflecting thewitness, when the Judge looked up from his notes to glare at that tremendousheresy about George Washington.            

Mr. Attorney-General now signified to my Lord, that he deemed it necessary, asa matter of precaution and form, to call the young ladyís father, DoctorManette. Who was called accordingly.            

ìDoctor Manette, look upon the prisoner. Have you ever seen himbefore?î            

ìOnce. When he called at my lodgings in London. Some three years, or threeyears and a half ago.î            

ìCan you identify him as your fellow-passenger on board the packet, or speakto his conversation with your daughter?î            

ìSir, I can do neither.î            

ìIs there any particular and special reason for your being unable to doeither?î            

He answered, in a low voice, ìThere is.î            

ìHas it been your misfortune to undergo a long imprisonment, without trial, oreven accusation, in your native country, Doctor Manette?î            

He answered, in a tone that went to every heart, ìA long imprisonment.î            

ìWere you newly released on the occasion in question?î            

ìThey tell me so.î            

ìHave you no remembrance of the occasion?î            

ìNone. My mind is a blank, from some timeóI cannot even say what timeówhen Iemployed myself, in my captivity, in making shoes, to the time when I foundmyself living in London with my dear daughter here. She had become familiar tome, when a gracious God restored my faculties; but, I am quite unable even tosay how she had become familiar. I have no remembrance of the process.î            

Mr. Attorney-General sat down, and the father and daughter sat downtogether.            

A singular circumstance then arose in the case. The object in hand being toshow that the prisoner went down, with some fellow-plotter untracked, in theDover mail on that Friday night in November five years ago, and got out of themail in the night, as a blind, at a place where he did not remain, but fromwhich he travelled back some dozen miles or more, to a garrison and dockyard,and there collected information; a witness was called to identify him as havingbeen at the precise time required, in the coffee-room of an hotel in thatgarrison-and-dockyard town, waiting for another person. The prisonerís counselwas cross-examining this witness with no result, except that he had never seenthe prisoner on any other occasion, when the wigged gentleman who had all thistime been looking at the ceiling of the court, wrote a word or two on a littlepiece of paper, screwed it up, and tossed it to him. Opening this piece of paperin the next pause, the counsel looked with great attention and curiosity at theprisoner.            

ìYou say again you are quite sure that it was the prisoner?î            

The witness was quite sure.            

ìDid you ever see anybody very like the prisoner?î            

Not so like (the witness said) as that he could be mistaken.            

ìLook well upon that gentleman, my learned friend there,î pointing to him whohad tossed the paper over, ìand then look well upon the prisoner. How say you?Are they very like each other?î            

Allowing for my learned friendís appearance being careless and slovenly if notdebauched, they were sufficiently like each other to surprise, not only thewitness, but everybody present, when they were thus brought into comparison. MyLord being prayed to bid my learned friend lay aside his wig, and giving no verygracious consent, the likeness became much more remarkable. My Lord inquired ofMr. Stryver (the prisonerís counsel), whether they were next to try Mr. Carton(name of my learned friend) for treason? But, Mr. Stryver replied to my Lord,no; but he would ask the witness to tell him whether what happened once, mighthappen twice; whether he would have been so confident if he had seen thisillustration of his rashness sooner, whether he would be so confident, havingseen it; and more. The upshot of which, was, to smash this witness like acrockery vessel, and shiver his part of the case to useless lumber.            

Mr. Cruncher had by this time taken quite a lunch of rust off his fingers inhis following of the evidence. He had now to attend while Mr. Stryver fitted theprisonerís case on the jury, like a compact suit of clothes; showing them howthe patriot, Barsad, was a hired spy and traitor, an unblushing trafficker inblood, and one of the greatest scoundrels upon earth since accursed Judasówhichhe certainly did look rather like. How the virtuous servant, Cly, was his friendand partner, and was worthy to be; how the watchful eyes of those forgers andfalse swearers had rested on the prisoner as a victim, because some familyaffairs in France, he being of French extraction, did require his making thosepassages across the Channelóthough what those affairs were, a consideration forothers who were near and dear to him, forbade him, even for his life, todisclose. How the evidence that had been warped and wrested from the young lady,whose anguish in giving it they had witnessed, came to nothing, involving themere little innocent gallantries and politenesses likely to pass between anyyoung gentleman and young lady so thrown together;ówith the exception of thatreference to George Washington, which was altogether too extravagant andimpossible to be regarded in any other light than as a monstrous joke. How itwould be a weakness in the government to break down in this attempt to practisefor popularity on the lowest national antipathies and fears, and therefore Mr.Attorney-General had made the most of it; how, nevertheless, it rested uponnothing, save that vile and infamous character of evidence too often disfiguringsuch cases, and of which the State Trials of this country were full. But, theremy Lord interposed (with as grave a face as if it had not been true), sayingthat he could not sit upon that Bench and suffer those allusions.            

Mr. Stryver then called his few witnesses, and Mr. Cruncher had next to attendwhile Mr. Attorney-General turned the whole suit of clothes Mr. Stryver hadfitted on the jury, inside out; showing how Barsad and Cly were even a hundredtimes better than he had thought them, and the prisoner a hundred times worse.Lastly, came my Lord himself, turning the suit of clothes, now inside out, nowoutside in, but on the whole decidedly trimming and shaping them intograve-clothes for the prisoner.            

And now, the jury turned to consider, and the great flies swarmedagain.            

Mr. Carton, who had so long sat looking at the ceiling of the court, changedneither his place nor his attitude, even in this excitement. While his teamedfriend, Mr. Stryver, massing his papers before him, whispered with those who satnear, and from time to time glanced anxiously at the jury; while all thespectators moved more or less, and grouped themselves anew; while even my Lordhimself arose from his seat, and slowly paced up and down his platform, notunattended by a suspicion in the minds of the audience that his state wasfeverish; this one man sat leaning back, with his torn gown half off him, hisuntidy wig put on just as it had happened to fight on his head after itsremoval, his hands in his pockets, and his eyes on the ceiling as they had beenall day. Something especially reckless in his demeanour, not only gave him adisreputable look, but so diminished the strong resemblance he undoubtedly boreto the prisoner (which his momentary earnestness, when they were comparedtogether, had strengthened), that many of the lookers-on, taking note of himnow, said to one another they would hardly have thought the two were so alike.Mr. Cruncher made the observation to his next neighbour, and added, ìIíd holdhalf a guinea that HE donít get no law-work to do. Donít look like the sort ofone to get any, do he?î            

Yet, this Mr. Carton took in more of the details of the scene than he appearedto take in; for now, when Miss Manetteís head dropped upon her fatherís breast,he was the first to see it, and to say audibly: ìOfficer! look to that younglady. Help the gentleman to take her out. Donít you see she will fall!î            

There was much commiseration for her as she was removed, and much sympathywith her father. It had evidently been a great distress to him, to have the daysof his imprisonment recalled. He had shown strong internal agitation when he wasquestioned, and that pondering or brooding look which made him old, had beenupon him, like a heavy cloud, ever since. As he passed out, the jury, who hadturned back and paused a moment, spoke, through their foreman.            

They were not agreed, and wished to retire. My Lord (perhaps with GeorgeWashington on his mind) showed some surprise that they were not agreed, butsignified his pleasure that they should retire under watch and ward, and retiredhimself. The trial had lasted all day, and the lamps in the court were now beinglighted. It began to be rumoured that the jury would be out a long while. Thespectators dropped off to get refreshment, and the prisoner withdrew to the backof the dock, and sat down.            

Mr. Lorry, who had gone out when the young lady and her father went out, nowreappeared, and beckoned to Jerry: who, in the slackened interest, could easilyget near him.            

ìJerry, if you wish to take something to eat, you can. But, keep in the way.You will be sure to hear when the jury come in. Donít be a moment behind them,for I want you to take the verdict back to the bank. You are the quickestmessenger I know, and will get to Temple Bar long before I can.î            

Jerry had just enough forehead to knuckle, and he knuckled it inacknowledgment of this communication and a shilling. Mr. Carton came up at themoment, and touched Mr. Lorry on the arm.            

ìHow is the young lady?î            

ìShe is greatly distressed; but her father is comforting her, and she feelsthe better for being out of court.î            

ìIíll tell the prisoner so. It wonít do for a respectable bank gentleman likeyou, to be seen speaking to him publicly, you know.î            

Mr. Lorry reddened as if he were conscious of having debated the point in hismind, and Mr. Carton made his way to the outside of the bar. The way out ofcourt lay in that direction, and Jerry followed him, all eyes, ears, andspikes.            

ìMr. Darnay!î            

The prisoner came forward directly.            

ìYou will naturally be anxious to hear of the witness, Miss Manette. She willdo very well. You have seen the worst of her agitation.î            

ìI am deeply sorry to have been the cause of it. Could you tell her so for me,with my fervent acknowledgments?î            

ìYes, I could. I will, if you ask it.î            

Mr. Cartonís manner was so careless as to be almost insolent. He stood, halfturned from the prisoner, lounging with his elbow against the bar.            

ìI do ask it. Accept my cordial thanks.î            

ìWhat,î said Carton, still only half turned towards him, ìdo you expect, Mr.Darnay?î            

ìThe worst.î            

ìItís the wisest thing to expect, and the likeliest. But I think theirwithdrawing is in your favour.î            

Loitering on the way out of court not being allowed, Jerry heard no more: butleft themóso like each other in feature, so unlike each other in manneróstandingside by side, both reflected in the glass above them.            

An hour and a half limped heavily away in the thief-and-rascal crowdedpassages below, even though assisted off with mutton pies and ale. The hoarsemessenger, uncomfortably seated on a form after taking that refection, haddropped into a doze, when a loud murmur and a rapid tide of people setting upthe stairs that led to the court, carried him along with them.            

ìJerry! Jerry!î Mr. Lorry was already calling at the door when he gotthere.            

ìHere, sir! Itís a fight to get back again. Here I am, sir!î            

Mr. Lorry handed him a paper through the throng. ìQuick! Have you gotit?î            

ìYes, sir.î            

Hastily written on the paper was the word ìACQUITTED.î            

ìIf you had sent the message, `Recalled to Life,í again,î muttered Jerry, ashe turned, ìI should have known what you meant, this time.î            

He had no opportunity of saying, or so much as thinking, anything else, untilhe was clear of the Old Bailey; for, the crowd came pouring out with a vehemencethat nearly took him off his legs, and a loud buzz swept into the street as ifthe baffled blue-flies were dispersing in search of other carrion.            

From the dimly-lighted passages of the court, the last sediment of the humanstew that had been boiling there all day, was straining off, when DoctorManette, Lucie Manette, his daughter, Mr. Lorry, the solicitor for the defence,and its counsel, Mr. Stryver, stood gathered round Mr. Charles Darnayójustreleasedócongratulating him on his escape from death.            

It would have been difficult by a far brighter light, to recognise in DoctorManette, intellectual of face and upright of bearing, the shoemaker of thegarret in Paris. Yet, no one could have looked at him twice, without lookingagain: even though the opportunity of observation had not extended to themournful cadence of his low grave voice, and to the abstraction that overcloudedhim fitfully, without any apparent reason. While one external cause, and that areference to his long lingering agony, would alwaysóas on the trialóevoke thiscondition from the depths of his soul, it was also in its nature to arise ofitself, and to draw a gloom over him, as incomprehensible to those unacquaintedwith his story as if they had seen the shadow of the actual Bastille thrown uponhim by a summer sun, when the substance was three hundred miles away.            

Only his daughter had the power of charming this black brooding from his mind.She was the golden thread that united him to a Past beyond his misery, and to aPresent beyond his misery: and the sound of her voice, the light of her face,the touch of her hand, had a strong beneficial influence with him almost always.Not absolutely always, for she could recall some occasions on which her powerhad failed; but they were few and slight, and she believed them over.            

Mr. Darnay had kissed her hand fervently and gratefully, and had turned to Mr.Stryver, whom he warmly thanked. Mr. Stryver, a man of little more than thirty,but looking twenty years older than he was, stout, loud, red, bluff, and freefrom any drawback of delicacy, had a pushing way of shouldering himself (morallyand physically) into companies and conversations, that argued well for hisshouldering his way up in life.            

He still had his wig and gown on, and he said, squaring himself at his lateclient to that degree that he squeezed the innocent Mr. Lorry clean out of thegroup: ìI am glad to have brought you off with honour, Mr. Darnay. It was aninfamous prosecution, grossly infamous; but not the less likely to succeed onthat account.î            

ìYou have laid me under an obligation to you for lifeóin two senses,î said hislate client, taking his hand.            

ìI have done my best for you, Mr. Darnay; and my best is as good as anothermanís, I believe.î            

It clearly being incumbent on some one to say, ìMuch better,î Mr. Lorry saidit; perhaps not quite disinterestedly, but with the interested object ofsqueezing himself back again.            

ìYou think so?î said Mr. Stryver. ìWell! you have been present all day, andyou ought to know. You are a man of business, too.î            

ìAnd as such,î quoth Mr. Lorry, whom the counsel learned in the law had nowshouldered back into the group, just as he had previously shouldered him out ofitóìas such I will appeal to Doctor Manette, to break up this conference andorder us all to our homes. Miss Lucie looks ill, Mr. Darnay has had a terribleday, we are worn out.î            

ìSpeak for yourself, Mr. Lorry,î said Stryver; ìI have a nightís work to doyet. Speak for yourself.î            

ìI speak for myself,î answered Mr. Lorry, ìand for Mr. Darnay, and for MissLucie, andóMiss Lucie, do you not think I may speak for us all?î He asked herthe question pointedly, and with a glance at her father.            

His face had become frozen, as it were, in a very curious look at Darnay: anintent look, deepening into a frown of dislike and distrust, not even unmixedwith fear. With this strange expression on him his thoughts had wanderedaway.            

ìMy father,î said Lucie, softly laying her hand on his.            

He slowly shook the shadow off, and turned to her.            

ìShall we go home, my father?î            

With a long breath, he answered ìYes.î            

The friends of the acquitted prisoner had dispersed, under theimpressionówhich he himself had originatedóthat he would not be released thatnight. The lights were nearly all extinguished in the passages, the iron gateswere being closed with a jar and a rattle, and the dismal place was deserteduntil to-morrow morningís interest of gallows, pillory, whipping-post, andbranding-iron, should repeople it. Walking between her father and Mr. Darnay,Lucie Manette passed into the open air. A hackney-coach was called, and thefather and daughter departed in it.            

Mr. Stryver had left them in the passages, to shoulder his way back to therobing-room. Another person, who had not joined the group, or interchanged aword with any one of them, but who had been leaning against the wall where itsshadow was darkest, had silently strolled out after the rest, and had looked onuntil the coach drove away. He now stepped up to where Mr. Lorry and Mr. Darnaystood upon the pavement.            

ìSo, Mr. Lorry! Men of business may speak to Mr. Darnay now?î            

Nobody had made any acknowledgment of Mr. Cartonís part in the dayísproceedings; nobody had known of it. He was unrobed, and was none the better forit in appearance.            

ìIf you knew what a conflict goes on in the business mind, when the businessmind is divided between good-natured impulse and business appearances, you wouldbe amused, Mr. Darnay.î            

Mr. Lorry reddened, and said, warmly, ìYou have mentioned that before, sir. Wemen of business, who serve a House, are not our own masters. We have to think ofthe House more than ourselves.î            

ìI know, I know,î rejoined Mr. Carton,carelessly. ìDonít be nettled, Mr. Lorry. You are as good as another, I have nodoubt: better, I dare say.î            

ìAnd indeed, sir,î pursued Mr. Lorry, not minding him, ìI really donít knowwhat you have to do with the matter. If youíll excuse me, as very much yourelder, for saying so, I really donít know that it is your business.î            

ìBusiness! Bless you, I have no business,î said Mr.Carton.            

ìIt is a pity you have not, sir.î            

ìI think so, too.î            

ìIf you had,î pursued Mr. Lorry, ìperhaps you would attend to it.î            

ìLord love you, no!óI shouldnít,î said Mr. Carton.            

ìWell, sir!î cried Mr. Lorry, thoroughly heated by his indifference, ìbusinessis a very good thing, and a very respectable thing. And, sir, if businessimposes its restraints and its silences and impediments, Mr. Darnay as a younggentleman of generosity knows how to make allowance for that circumstance. Mr.Darnay, good night, God bless you, sir! I hope you have been this day preservedfor a prosperous and happy life.óChair there!î            

Perhaps a little angry with himself, as well as with the barrister, Mr. Lorrybustled into the chair, and was carried off to Tellsonís. Carton, who smelt ofport wine, and did not appear to be quite sober, laughed then, and turned toDarnay:            

ìThis is a strange chance that throws you and me together. This must be astrange night to you, standing alone here with your counterpart on these streetstones?î            

ìI hardly seem yet,î returned Charles Darnay, ìto belong to this worldagain.î            

ìI donít wonder at it; itís not so long since you were pretty far advanced onyour way to another. You speak faintly.î            

ìI begin to think I AM faint.î            

ìThen why the devil donít you dine? I dined, myself, while those numskullswere deliberating which world you should belong toóthis, or some other. Let meshow you the nearest tavern to dine well at.î            

Drawing his arm through his own, he took him down Ludgate-hill toFleet-street, and so, up a covered way, into a tavern. Here, they were showninto a little room, where Charles Darnay was soon recruiting his strength with agood plain dinner and good wine: while Carton sat opposite to him at the sametable, with his separate bottle of port before him, and his fully half-insolentmanner upon him.            

ìDo you feel, yet, that you belong to this terrestrial scheme again, Mr.Darnay?î            

ìI am frightfully confused regarding time and place; but I am so far mended asto feel that.î            

ìIt must be an immense satisfaction!î            

He said it bitterly, and filled up his glass again: which was a largeone.            

ìAs to me, the greatest desire I have, is to forget that I belong to it. Ithas no good in it for meóexcept wine like thisónor I for it. So we are not muchalike in that particular. Indeed, I begin to think we are not much alike in anyparticular, you and I.î            

Confused by the emotion of the day, and feeling his being there with thisDouble of coarse deportment, to be like a dream, Charles Darnay was at a losshow to answer; finally, answered not at all.            

ìNow your dinner is done,î Carton presently said, ìwhy donít you call ahealth, Mr. Darnay; why donít you give your toast?î            

ìWhat health? What toast?î            

ìWhy, itís on the tip of your tongue. It ought to be, it must be, Iíll swearitís there.î            

ìMiss Manette, then!î            

ìMiss Manette, then!î            

Looking his companion full in the face while he drank the toast, Carton flunghis glass over his shoulder against the wall, where it shivered to pieces; then,rang the bell, and ordered in another.            

ìThatís a fair young lady to hand to a coach in the dark, Mr. Darnay!î hesaid, ruing his new goblet.            

A slight frown and a laconic ìYes,î were the answer.            

ìThatís a fair young lady to be pitied by and wept for by! How does it feel?Is it worth being tried for oneís life, to be the object of such sympathy andcompassion, Mr. Darnay?î            

Again Darnay answered not a word.            

ìShe was mightily pleased to have your message, when I gave it her. Not thatshe showed she was pleased, but I suppose she was.î            

The allusion served as a timely reminder to Darnay that this disagreeablecompanion had, of his own free will, assisted him in the strait of the day. Heturned the dialogue to that point, and thanked him for it.            

ìI neither want any thanks, nor merit any,î was the careless rejoinder. ìItwas nothing to do, in the first place; and I donít know why I did it, in thesecond. Mr. Darnay, let me ask you a question.î            

ìWillingly, and a small return for your good offices.î            

ìDo you think I particularly like you?î            

ìReally, Mr. Carton,î returned the other, oddly disconcerted, ìI have notasked myself the question.î            

ìBut ask yourself the question now.î            

ìYou have acted as if you do; but I donít think you do.î            

ìI donít think I do,î said Carton. ìI begin to have a verygood opinion of your understanding.î            

ìNevertheless,î pursued Darnay, rising to ring the bell, ìthere is nothing inthat, I hope, to prevent my calling the reckoning, and our parting withoutill-blood on either side.î            

Carton rejoining, ìNothing in life!î Darnay rang. ìDo you call the wholereckoning?î said Carton. On his answering in the affirmative, ìThen bring meanother pint of this same wine, drawer, and come and wake me at ten.î            

The bill being paid, Charles Darnay rose and wished him good night. Withoutreturning the wish, Carton rose too, with something of a threat of defiance inhis manner, and said, ìA last word, Mr. Darnay: you think I am drunk?î            

ìI think you have been drinking, Mr. Carton.î            

ìThink? You know I have been drinking.î            

ìSince I must say so, I know it.î            

ìThen you shall likewise know why. I am a disappointed drudge, sir. I care forno man on earth, and no man on earth cares for me.î            

ìMuch to be regretted. You might have used your talents better.î            

ìMay be so, Mr. Darnay; may be not. Donít let your sober face elate you,however; you donít know what it may come to. Good night!î            

When he was left alone, this strange being took up a candle, went to a glassthat hung against the wall, and surveyed himself minutely in it.            

ìDo you particularly like the man?î he muttered, at his own image; ìwhy shouldyou particularly like a man who resembles you? There is nothing in you to like;you know that. Ah, confound you! What a change you have made in yourself! A goodreason for taking to a man, that he shows you what you have fallen away from,and what you might have been! Change places with him, and would you have beenlooked at by those blue eyes as he was, and commiserated by that agitated faceas he was? Come on, and have it out in plain words! You hate the fellow.î            

He resorted to his pint of wine for consolation, drank it all in a fewminutes, and fell asleep on his arms, with his hair straggling over the table,and a long winding-sheet in the candle dripping down upon him.            

Those were drinking days, and most men drank hard. So very great is theimprovement Time has brought about in such habits, that a moderate statement ofthe quantity of wine and punch which one man would swallow in the course of anight, without any detriment to his reputation as a perfect gentleman, wouldseem, in these days, a ridiculous exaggeration. The learned profession of thelaw was certainly not behind any other learned profession in its Bacchanalianpropensities; neither was Mr. Stryver, already fast shouldering his way to alarge and lucrative practice, behind his compeers in this particular, any morethan in the drier parts of the legal race.            

A favourite at the Old Bailey, and eke at the Sessions, Mr. Stryver had beguncautiously to hew away the lower staves of the ladder on which he mounted.Sessions and Old Bailey had now to summon their favourite, specially, to theirlonging arms; and shouldering itself towards the visage of the Lord ChiefJustice in the Court of Kingís Bench, the florid countenance of Mr. Stryvermight be daily seen, bursting out of the bed of wigs, like a great sunflowerpushing its way at the sun from among a rank garden-full of flaringcompanions.            

It had once been noted at the Bar, that while Mr. Stryver was a glib man, andan unscrupulous, and a ready, and a bold, he had not that faculty of extractingthe essence from a heap of statements, which is among the most striking andnecessary of the advocateís accomplishments. But, a remarkable improvement cameupon him as to this. The more business he got, the greater his power seemed togrow of getting at its pith and marrow; and however late at night he satcarousing with Sydney Carton, he always had his points at his fingersí ends inthe morning.            

Sydney Carton, idlest and most unpromising of men, was Stryverís great ally.What the two drank together, between Hilary Term and Michaelmas, might havefloated a kingís ship. Stryver never had a case in hand, anywhere, but Cartonwas there, with his hands in his pockets, staring at the ceiling of the court;they went the same Circuit, and even there they prolonged their usual orgieslate into the night, and Carton was rumoured to be seen at broad day, going homestealthily and unsteadily to his lodgings, like a dissipated cat. At last, itbegan to get about, among such as were interested in the matter, that althoughSydney Carton would never be a lion, he was an amazingly good jackal, and thathe rendered suit and service to Stryver in that humble capacity.            

ìTen oíclock, sir,î said the man at the tavern, whom he had charged to wakehimóîten oíclock, sir.î            

ìWHATíS the matter?î            

ìTen oíclock, sir.î            

ìWhat do you mean? Ten oíclock at night?î            

ìYes, sir. Your honour told me to call you.î            

ìOh! I remember. Very well, very well.î            

After a few dull efforts to get to sleep again, which the man dexterouslycombated by stirring the fire continuously for five minutes, he got up, tossedhis hat on, and walked out. He turned into the Temple, and, having revivedhimself by twice pacing the pavements of Kingís Bench-walk and Paper-buildings,turned into the Stryver chambers.            

The Stryver clerk, who never assisted at these conferences, had gone home, andthe Stryver principal opened the door. He had his slippers on, and a loosebed-gown, and his throat was bare for his greater ease. He had that rather wild,strained, seared marking about the eyes, which may be observed in all freelivers of his class, from the portrait of Jeffries downward, and which can betraced, under various disguises of Art, through the portraits of every DrinkingAge.            

ìYou are a little late, Memory,î said Stryver.            

ìAbout the usual time; it may be a quarter of an hour later.î            

They went into a dingy room lined with books and littered with papers, wherethere was a blazing fire. A kettle steamed upon the hob, and in the midst of thewreck of papers a table shone, with plenty of wine upon it, and brandy, and rum,and sugar, and lemons.            

ìYou have had your bottle, I perceive, Sydney.î            

ìTwo to-night, I think. I have been dining with the dayís client; or seeinghim dineóitís all one!î            

ìThat was a rare point, Sydney, that you brought to bear upon theidentification. How did you come by it? When did it strike you?î            

ìI thought he was rather a handsome fellow, and I thought I should have beenmuch the same sort of fellow, if I had had any luck.î            

Mr. Stryver laughed till he shook his precocious paunch.            

ìYou and your luck, Sydney! Get to work, get to work.î            

Sullenly enough, the jackal loosened his dress, went into an adjoining room,and came back with a large jug of cold water, a basin, and a towel or two.Steeping the towels in the water, and partially wringing them out, he foldedthem on his head in a manner hideous to behold, sat down at the table, and said,ìNow I am ready!î            

ìNot much boiling down to be done to-night, Memory,î said Mr. Stryver, gaily,as he looked among his papers.            

ìHow much?î            

ìOnly two sets of them.î            

ìGive me the worst first.î            

ìThere they are, Sydney. Fire away!î            

The lion then composed himself on his back on a sofa on one side of thedrinking-table, while the jackal sat at his own paper-bestrewn table proper, onthe other side of it, with the bottles and glasses ready to his hand. Bothresorted to the drinking-table without stint, but each in a different way; thelion for the most part reclining with his hands in his waistband, looking at thefire, or occasionally flirting with some lighter document; the jackal, withknitted brows and intent face, so deep in his task, that his eyes did not evenfollow the hand he stretched out for his glassówhich often groped about, for aminute or more, before it found the glass for his lips. Two or three times, thematter in hand became so knotty, that the jackal found it imperative on him toget up, and steep his towels anew. From these pilgrimages to the jug and basin,he returned with such eccentricities of damp headgear as no words can describe;which were made the more ludicrous by his anxious gravity.            

At length the jackal had got together a compact repast for the lion, andproceeded to offer it to him. The lion took it with care and caution, made hisselections from it, and his remarks upon it, and the jackal assisted both. Whenthe repast was fully discussed, the lion put his hands in his waistband again,and lay down to mediate. The jackal then invigorated himself with a bum for histhrottle, and a fresh application to his head, and applied himself to thecollection of a second meal; this was administered to the lion in the samemanner, and was not disposed of until the clocks struck three in themorning.            

ìAnd now we have done, Sydney, fill a bumper of punch,î said Mr.Stryver.            

The jackal removed the towels from his head, which had been steaming again,shook himself, yawned, shivered, and complied.            

ìYou were very sound, Sydney, in the matter of those crown witnesses to-day.Every question told.î            

ìI always am sound; am I not?î            

ìI donít gainsay it. What has roughened your temper? Put some punch to it andsmooth it again.î            

With a deprecatory grunt, the jackal again complied.            

ìThe old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School,î said Stryver, nodding hishead over him as he reviewed him in the present and the past, ìthe old seesawSydney. Up one minute and down the next; now in spirits and now indespondency!î            

ìAh!î returned the other, sighing: ìyes! The same Sydney, with the same luck.Even then, I did exercises for other boys, and seldom did my own.î            

ìAnd why not?î            

ìGod knows. It was my way, I suppose.î            

He sat, with his hands in his pockets and his legs stretched out before him,looking at the fire.            

ìCarton,î said his friend, squaring himself at him with a bullying air, as ifthe fire-grate had been the furnace in which sustained endeavour was forged, andthe one delicate thing to be done for the old Sydney Carton of old ShrewsburySchool was to shoulder him into it, ìyour way is, and always was, a lame way.You summon no energy and purpose. Look at me.î            

ìOh, botheration!î returned Sydney, with a lighter and more good-humouredlaugh, ìdonít YOU be moral!î            

ìHow have I done what I have done?î said Stryver; ìhow do I do what Ido?î            

ìPartly through paying me to help you, I suppose. But itís not worth yourwhile to apostrophise me, or the air, about it; what you want to do, you do. Youwere always in the front rank, and I was always behind.î            

ìI had to get into the front rank; I was not born there, was I?î            

ìI was not present at the ceremony; but my opinion is you were,î said Carton.At this, he laughed again, and they both laughed.            

ìBefore Shrewsbury, and at Shrewsbury, and ever since Shrewsbury,î pursuedCarton, ìyou have fallen into your rank, and I have fallen into mine. Even whenwe were fellow-students in the Student-Quarter of Paris, picking up French, andFrench law, and other French crumbs that we didnít get much good of, you werealways somewhere, and I was always nowhere.î            

ìAnd whose fault was that?î            

ìUpon my soul, I am not sure that it was not yours. You were always drivingand riving and shouldering and passing, to that restless degree that I had nochance for my life but in rust and repose. Itís a gloomy thing, however, to talkabout oneís own past, with the day breaking. Turn me in some other directionbefore I go.î            

ìWell then! Pledge me to the pretty witness,î said Stryver, holding up hisglass. ìAre you turned in a pleasant direction?î            

Apparently not, for he became gloomy again.            

ìPretty witness,î he muttered, looking down into his glass. ìI have had enoughof witnesses to-day and to-night; whoís your pretty witness?î            

ìThe picturesque doctorís daughter, Miss Manette.î            

ìSHE pretty?î            

ìIs she not?î            

ìNo.î            

ìWhy, man alive, she was the admiration of the whole Court!î            

ìRot the admiration of the whole Court! Who made the Old Bailey a judge ofbeauty? She was a golden-haired doll!î            

ìDo you know, Sydney,î said Mr. Stryver, looking at him with sharp eyes, andslowly drawing a hand across his florid face: ìdo you know, I rather thought, atthe time, that you sympathised with the golden-haired doll, and were quick tosee what happened to the golden-haired doll?î            

ìQuick to see what happened! If a girl, doll or no doll, swoons within a yardor two of a manís nose, he can see it without a perspective-glass. I pledge you,but I deny the beauty. And now Iíll have no more drink; Iíll get to bed.î            

When his host followed him out on the staircase with a candle, to light himdown the stairs, the day was coldly looking in through its grimy windows. Whenhe got out of the house, the air was cold and sad, the dull sky overcast, theriver dark and dim, the whole scene like a lifeless desert. And wreaths of dustwere spinning round and round before the morning blast, as if the desert-sandhad risen far away, and the first spray of it in its advance had begun tooverwhelm the city.            

Waste forces within him, and a desert all around, this man stood still on hisway across a silent terrace, and saw for a moment, lying in the wildernessbefore him, a mirage of honourable ambition, self-denial, and perseverance. Inthe fair city of this vision, there were airy galleries from which the loves andgraces looked upon him, gardens in which the fruits of life hung ripening,waters of Hope that sparkled in his sight. A moment, and it was gone. Climbingto a high chamber in a well of houses, he threw himself down in his clothes on aneglected bed, and its pillow was wet with wasted tears.            

Sadly, sadly, the sun rose; it rose upon no sadder sight than the man of goodabilities and good emotions, incapable of their directed exercise, incapable ofhis own help and his own happiness, sensible of the blight on him, and resigninghimself to let it eat him away.            

The quiet lodgings of Doctor Manette were in a quiet street-corner not farfrom Soho-square. On the afternoon of a certain fine Sunday when the waves offour months had roiled over the trial for treason, and carried it, as to thepublic interest and memory, far out to sea, Mr. Jarvis Lorry walked along thesunny streets from Clerkenwell where he lived, on his way to dine with theDoctor. After several relapses into business-absorption, Mr. Lorry had becomethe Doctorís friend, and the quiet street-corner was the sunny part of hislife.            

On this certain fine Sunday, Mr. Lorry walked towards Soho, early in theafternoon, for three reasons of habit. Firstly, because, on fine Sundays, heoften walked out, before dinner, with the Doctor and Lucie; secondly, because,on unfavourable Sundays, he was accustomed to be with them as the family friend,talking, reading, looking out of window, and generally getting through the day;thirdly, because he happened to have his own little shrewd doubts to solve, andknew how the ways of the Doctorís household pointed to that time as a likelytime for solving them.            

A quainter corner than the corner where the Doctor lived, was not to be foundin London. There was no way through it, and the front windows of the Doctoríslodgings commanded a pleasant little vista of street that had a congenial air ofretirement on it. There were few buildings then, north of the Oxford-road, andforest-trees flourished, and wild flowers grew, and the hawthorn blossomed, inthe now vanished fields. As a consequence, country airs circulated in Soho withvigorous freedom, instead of languishing into the parish like stray pauperswithout a settlement; and there was many a good south wall, not far off, onwhich the peaches ripened in their season.            

The summer light struck into the corner brilliantly in the earlier part of theday; but, when the streets grew hot, the corner was in shadow, though not inshadow so remote but that you could see beyond it into a glare of brightness. Itwas a cool spot, staid but cheerful, a wonderful place for echoes, and a veryharbour from the raging streets.            

There ought to have been a tranquil bark in such an anchorage, and there was.The Doctor occupied two floors of a large stiff house, where several callingspurported to be pursued by day, but whereof little was audible any day, andwhich was shunned by all of them at night. In a building at the back, attainableby a courtyard where a plane-tree rustled its green leaves, church-organsclaimed to be made, and silver to be chased, and likewise gold to be beaten bysome mysterious giant who had a golden arm starting out of the wall of the fronthallóas if he had beaten himself precious, and menaced a similar conversion ofall visitors. Very little of these trades, or of a lonely lodger rumoured tolive up-stairs, or of a dim coach-trimming maker asserted to have acounting-house below, was ever heard or seen. Occasionally, a stray workmanputting his coat on, traversed the hall, or a stranger peered about there, or adistant clink was heard across the courtyard, or a thump from the golden giant.These, however, were only the exceptions required to prove the rule that thesparrows in the plane-tree behind the house, and the echoes in the corner beforeit, had their own way from Sunday morning unto Saturday night.            

Doctor Manette received such patients here as his old reputation, and itsrevival in the floating whispers of his story, brought him. His scientificknowledge, and his vigilance and skill in conducting ingenious experiments,brought him otherwise into moderate request, and he earned as much as hewanted.            

These things were within Mr. Jarvis Lorryís knowledge, thoughts, and notice,when he rang the door-bell of the tranquil house in the corner, on the fineSunday afternoon.            

ìDoctor Manette at home?î            

Expected home.            

ìMiss Lucie at home?î            

Expected home.            

ìMiss Pross at home?î            

Possibly at home, but of a certainty impossible for handmaid to anticipateintentions of Miss Pross, as to admission or denial of the fact.            

ìAs I am at home myself,î said Mr. Lorry, ìIíll go upstairs.î            

Although the Doctorís daughter had known nothing of the country of her birth,she appeared to have innately derived from it that ability to make much oflittle means, which is one of its most useful and most agreeablecharacteristics. Simple as the furniture was, it was set off by so many littleadornments, of no value but for their taste and fancy, that its effect wasdelightful. The disposition of everything in the rooms, from the largest objectto the least; the arrangement of colours, the elegant variety and contrastobtained by thrift in trifles, by delicate hands, clear eyes, and good sense;were at once so pleasant in themselves, and so expressive of their originator,that, as Mr. Lorry stood looking about him, the very chairs and tables seemed toask him, with something of that peculiar expression which he knew so well bythis time, whether he approved?            

There were three rooms on a floor, and, the doors by which they communicatedbeing put open that the air might pass freely through them all, Mr. Lorry,smilingly observant of that fanciful resemblance which he detected all aroundhim, walked from one to another. The first was the best room, and in it wereLucieís birds, and flowers, and books, and desk, and work-table, and box ofwater-colours; the second was the Doctorís consulting-room, used also as thedining-room; the third, changingly speckled by the rustle of the plane-tree inthe yard, was the Doctorís bedroom, and there, in a corner, stood the disusedshoemakerís bench and tray of tools, much as it had stood on the fifth floor ofthe dismal house by the wine-shop, in the suburb of Saint Antoine inParis.            

ìI wonder,î said Mr. Lorry, pausing in his looking about, ìthat he keeps thatreminder of his sufferings about him!î            

ìAnd why wonder at that?î was the abrupt inquiry that made him start.            

It proceeded from Miss Pross, the wild red woman, strong of hand, whoseacquaintance he had first made at the Royal George Hotel at Dover, and had sinceimproved.            

ìI should have thoughtóî Mr. Lorry began.            

ìPooh! Youíd have thought!î said Miss Pross; and Mr. Lorry left off.            

ìHow do you do?î inquired that lady thenósharply, and yet as if to expressthat she bore him no malice.            

ìI am pretty well, I thank you,î answered Mr. Lorry, with meekness; ìhow areyou?î            

ìNothing to boast of,î said Miss Pross.            

ìIndeed?î            

ìAh! indeed!î said Miss Pross. ìI am very much put out about myLadybird.î            

ìIndeed?î            

ìFor gracious sake say something else besides `indeed,í or youíll fidget me todeath,î said Miss Pross: whose character (dissociated from stature) wasshortness.            

ìReally, then?î said Mr. Lorry, as an amendment.            

ìReally, is bad enough,î returned Miss Pross, ìbut better. Yes, I am very muchput out.î            

ìMay I ask the cause?î            

ìI donít want dozens of people who are not at all worthy of Ladybird, to comehere looking after her,î said Miss Pross.            

ìDO dozens come for that purpose?î            

ìHundreds,î said Miss Pross.            

It was characteristic of this lady (as of some other people before her timeand since) that whenever her original proposition was questioned, sheexaggerated it.            

ìDear me!î said Mr. Lorry, as the safest remark he could think of.             

ìI have lived with the darlingóor the darling has lived with me, and paid mefor it; which she certainly should never have done, you may take your affidavit,if I could have afforded to keep either myself or her for nothing--since she wasten years old. And itís really very hard,î said Miss Pross.            

Not seeing with precision what was very hard, Mr. Lorry shook his head; usingthat important part of himself as a sort of fairy cloak that would fitanything.            

ìAll sorts of people who are not in the least degree worthy of the pet, arealways turning up,î said Miss Pross. ìWhen you began itóî            

ìI began it, Miss Pross?î            

ìDidnít you? Who brought her father to life?î            

ìOh! If THAT was beginning itóî said Mr. Lorry.            

ìIt wasnít ending it, I suppose? I say, when you began it, it was hard enough;not that I have any fault to find with Doctor Manette, except that he is notworthy of such a daughter, which is no imputation on him, for it was not to beexpected that anybody should be, under any circumstances. But it really isdoubly and trebly hard to have crowds and multitudes of people turning up afterhim (I could have forgiven him), to take Ladybirdís affections away fromme.î            

Mr. Lorry knew Miss Pross to be very jealous, but he also knew her by thistime to be, beneath the service of her eccentricity, one of those unselfishcreaturesófound only among womenówho will, for pure love and admiration, bindthemselves willing slaves, to youth when they have lost it, to beauty that theynever had, to accomplishments that they were never fortunate enough to gain, tobright hopes that never shone upon their own sombre lives. He knew enough of theworld to know that there is nothing in it better than the faithful service ofthe heart; so rendered and so free from any mercenary taint, he had such anexalted respect for it, that in the retributive arrangements made by his ownmindówe all make such arrangements, more or lessóhe stationed Miss Pross muchnearer to the lower Angels than many ladies immeasurably better got up both byNature and Art, who had balances at Tellsonís.            

ìThere never was, nor will be, but one man worthy of Ladybird,î said MissPross; ìand that was my brother Solomon, if he hadnít made a mistake inlife.î            

Here again: Mr. Lorryís inquiries into Miss Prossís personal history hadestablished the fact that her brother Solomon was a heartless scoundrel who hadstripped her of everything she possessed, as a stake to speculate with, and hadabandoned her in her poverty for evermore, with no touch of compunction. MissProssís fidelity of belief in Solomon (deducting a mere trifle for this slightmistake) was quite a serious matter with Mr. Lorry, and had its weight in hisgood opinion of her.            

ìAs we happen to be alone for the moment, and are both people of business,î hesaid, when they had got back to the drawing-room and had sat down there infriendly relations, ìlet me ask youódoes the Doctor, in talking with Lucie,never refer to the shoemaking time, yet?î            

ìNever.î            

ìAnd yet keeps that bench and those tools beside him?î            

ìAh!î returned Miss Pross, shaking her head. ìBut I donít say he donít referto it within himself.î            

ìDo you believe that he thinks of it much?î            

ìI do,î said Miss Pross.            

ìDo you imagineóî Mr. Lorry had begun, when Miss Pross took him up shortwith:            

ìNever imagine anything. Have no imagination at all.î            

ìI stand corrected; do you supposeóyou go so far as to suppose,sometimes?î            

ìNow and then,î said Miss Pross.            

ìDo you suppose,î Mr. Lorry went on, with a laughing twinkle in his brighteye, as it looked kindly at her, ìthat Doctor Manette has any theory of his own,preserved through all those years, relative to the cause of his being sooppressed; perhaps, even to the name of his oppressor?î            

ìI donít suppose anything about it but what Ladybird tells me.î            

ìAnd that isó?î            

ìThat she thinks he has.î            

ìNow donít be angry at my asking all these questions; because I am a mere dullman of business, and you are a woman of business.î            

ìDull?î Miss Pross inquired, with placidity.            

Rather wishing his modest adjective away, Mr. Lorry replied, ìNo, no, no.Surely not. To return to business:óIs it not remarkable that Doctor Manette,unquestionably innocent of any crime as we are all well assured he is, shouldnever touch upon that question? I will not say with me, though he had businessrelations with me many years ago, and we are now intimate; I will say with thefair daughter to whom he is so devotedly attached, and who is so devotedlyattached to him? Believe me, Miss Pross, I donít approach the topic with you,out of curiosity, but out of zealous interest.î            

ìWell! To the best of my understanding, and badís the best, youíll tell me,îsaid Miss Pross, softened by the tone of the apology, ìhe is afraid of the wholesubject.î            

ìAfraid?î            

ìItís plain enough, I should think, why he may be. Itís a dreadfulremembrance. Besides that, his loss of himself grew out of it. Not knowing howhe lost himself, or how he recovered himself, he may never feel certain of notlosing himself again. That alone wouldnít make the subject pleasant, I shouldthink.î            

It was a profounder remark than Mr. Lorry had looked for. ìTrue,î said he,ìand fearful to reflect upon. Yet, a doubt lurks in my mind, Miss Pross, whetherit is good for Doctor Manette to have that suppression always shut up withinhim. Indeed, it is this doubt and the uneasiness it sometimes causes me that hasled me to our present confidence.î            

ìCanít be helped,î said Miss Pross, shaking her head. ìTouch that string, andhe instantly changes for the worse. Better leave it alone. In short, must leaveit alone, like or no like. Sometimes, he gets up in the dead of the night, andwill be heard, by us overhead there, walking up and down, walking up and down,in his room. Ladybird has learnt to know then that his mind is walking up anddown, walking up and down, in his old prison. She hurries to him, and they go ontogether, walking up and down, walking up and down, until he is composed. But henever says a word of the true reason of his restlessness, to her, and she findsit best not to hint at it to him. In silence they go walking up and downtogether, walking up and down together, till her love and company have broughthim to himself.î            

Notwithstanding Miss Prossís denial of her own imagination, there was aperception of the pain of being monotonously haunted by one sad idea, in herrepetition of the phrase, walking up and down, which testified to her possessingsuch a thing.            

The corner has been mentioned as a wonderful corner for echoes; it had begunto echo so resoundingly to the tread of coming feet, that it seemed as thoughthe very mention of that weary pacing to and fro had set it going.            

ìHere they are!î said Miss Pross, rising to break up the conference; ìand nowwe shall have hundreds of people pretty soon!î            

It was such a curious corner in its acoustical properties, such a peculiar Earof a place, that as Mr. Lorry stood at the open window, looking for the fatherand daughter whose steps he heard, he fancied they would never approach. Notonly would the echoes die away, as though the steps had gone; but, echoes ofother steps that never came would be heard in their stead, and would die awayfor good when they seemed close at hand. However, father and daughter did atlast appear, and Miss Pross was ready at the street door to receive them.            

Miss Pross was a pleasant sight, albeit wild, and red, and grim, taking offher darlingís bonnet when she came up-stairs, and touching it up with the endsof her handkerchief, and blowing the dust off it, and folding her mantle readyfor laying by, and smoothing her rich hair with as much pride as she couldpossibly have taken in her own hair if she had been the vainest and handsomestof women. Her darling was a pleasant sight too, embracing her and thanking her,and protesting against her taking so much trouble for herówhich last she onlydared to do playfully, or Miss Pross, sorely hurt, would have retired to her ownchamber and cried. The Doctor was a pleasant sight too, looking on at them, andtelling Miss Pross how she spoilt Lucie, in accents and with eyes that had asmuch spoiling in them as Miss Pross had, and would have had more if it werepossible. Mr. Lorry was a pleasant sight too, beaming at all this in his littlewig, and thanking his bachelor stars for having lighted him in his decliningyears to a Home. But, no Hundreds of people came to see the sights, and Mr.Lorry looked in vain for the fulfilment of Miss Prossís prediction.            

Dinner-time, and still no Hundreds of people. In the arrangements of thelittle household, Miss Pross took charge of the lower regions, and alwaysacquitted herself marvellously. Her dinners, of a very modest quality, were sowell cooked and so well served, and so neat in their contrivances, half Englishand half French, that nothing could be better. Miss Prossís friendship being ofthe thoroughly practical kind, she had ravaged Soho and the adjacent provinces,in search of impoverished French, who, tempted by shillings and half-crowns,would impart culinary mysteries to her. From these decayed sons and daughters ofGaul, she had acquired such wonderful arts, that the woman and girl who formedthe staff of domestics regarded her as quite a Sorceress, or CinderellaísGodmother: who would send out for a fowl, a rabbit, a vegetable or two from thegarden, and change them into anything she pleased.            

On Sundays, Miss Pross dined at the Doctorís table, but on other dayspersisted in taking her meals at unknown periods, either in the lower regions,or in her own room on the second flooróa blue chamber, to which no one but herLadybird ever gained admittance. On this occasion, Miss Pross, responding toLadybirdís pleasant face and pleasant efforts to please her, unbent exceedingly;so the dinner was very pleasant, too.            

It was an oppressive day, and, after dinner, Lucie proposed that the wineshould be carried out under the plane-tree, and they should sit there in theair. As everything turned upon her, and revolved about her, they went out underthe plane-tree, and she carried the wine down for the special benefit of Mr.Lorry. She had installed herself, some time before, as Mr. Lorryís cup-bearer;and while they sat under the plane-tree, talking, she kept his glassreplenished. Mysterious backs and ends of houses peeped at them as they talked,and the plane-tree whispered to them in its own way above their heads.            

Still, the Hundreds of people did not present themselves. Mr. Darnay presentedhimself while they were sitting under the plane-tree, but he was onlyOne.            

Doctor Manette received him kindly, and so did Lucie. But, Miss Pross suddenlybecame afflicted with a twitching in the head and body, and retired into thehouse. She was not unfrequently the victim of this disorder, and she called it,in familiar conversation, ìa fit of the jerks.î            

The Doctor was in his best condition, and looked specially young. Theresemblance between him and Lucie was very strong at such times, and as they satside by side, she leaning on his shoulder, and he resting his arm on the back ofher chair, it was very agreeable to trace the likeness.            

He had been talking all day, on many subjects, and with unusual vivacity.ìPray, Doctor Manette,î said Mr. Darnay, as they sat under the plane-treeóand hesaid it in the natural pursuit of the topic in hand, which happened to be theold buildings of Londonóîhave you seen much of the Tower?î            

ìLucie and I have been there; but only casually. We have seen enough of it, toknow that it teems with interest; little more.î            

ìI have been there, as you remember,î said Darnay, with asmile, though reddening a little angrily, ìin another character, and not in acharacter that gives facilities for seeing much of it. They told me a curiousthing when I was there.î            

ìWhat was that?î Lucie asked.            

ìIn making some alterations, the workmen came upon an old dungeon, which hadbeen, for many years, built up and forgotten. Every stone of its inner wall wascovered by inscriptions which had been carved by prisonersódates, names,complaints, and prayers. Upon a corner stone in an angle of the wall, oneprisoner, who seemed to have gone to execution, had cut as his last work, threeletters. They were done with some very poor instrument, and hurriedly, with anunsteady hand. At first, they were read as D. I. C.; but, on being morecarefully examined, the last letter was found to be G. There was no record orlegend of any prisoner with those initials, and many fruitless guesses were madewhat the name could have been. At length, it was suggested that the letters werenot initials, but the complete word, DIG. The floor was examined very carefullyunder the inscription, and, in the earth beneath a stone, or tile, or somefragment of paving, were found the ashes of a paper, mingled with the ashes of asmall leathern case or bag. What the unknown prisoner had written will never beread, but he had written something, and hidden it away to keep it from thegaoler.î            

ìMy father,î exclaimed Lucie, ìyou are ill!î            

He had suddenly started up, with his hand to his head. His manner and his lookquite terrified them all.            

ìNo, my dear, not ill. There are large drops of rain falling, and they made mestart. We had better go in.î            

He recovered himself almost instantly. Rain was really falling in large drops,and he showed the back of his hand with rain-drops on it. But, he said not asingle word in reference to the discovery that had been told of, and, as theywent into the house, the business eye of Mr. Lorry either detected, or fanciedit detected, on his face, as it turned towards Charles Darnay, the same singularlook that had been upon it when it turned towards him in the passages of theCourt House.            

He recovered himself so quickly, however, that Mr. Lorry had doubts of hisbusiness eye. The arm of the golden giant in the hall was not more steady thanhe was, when he stopped under it to remark to them that he was not yet proofagainst slight surprises (if he ever would be), and that the rain had startledhim.            

Tea-time, and Miss Pross making tea, with another fit of the jerks upon her,and yet no Hundreds of people. Mr. Carton had lounged in, but he made onlyTwo.            

The night was so very sultry, that although they sat with doors and windowsopen, they were overpowered by heat. When the tea-table was done with, they allmoved to one of the windows, and looked out into the heavy twilight. Lucie satby her father; Darnay sat beside her; Carton leaned against a window. Thecurtains were long and white, and some of the thunder-gusts that whirled intothe corner, caught them up to the ceiling, and waved them like spectralwings.            

ìThe rain-drops are still falling, large, heavy, and few,î said DoctorManette. ìIt comes slowly.î            

ìIt comes surely,î said Carton.            

They spoke low, as people watching and waiting mostly do; as people in a darkroom, watching and waiting for Lightning, always do.            

There was a great hurry in the streets of people speeding away to get shelterbefore the storm broke; the wonderful corner for echoes resounded with theechoes of footsteps coming and going, yet not a footstep was there.            

ìA multitude of people, and yet a solitude!î said Darnay, when they hadlistened for a while.            

ìIs it not impressive, Mr. Darnay?î asked Lucie. ìSometimes, I have sat hereof an evening, until I have fanciedóbut even the shade of a foolish fancy makesme shudder to-night, when all is so black and solemnóî            

ìLet us shudder too. We may know what it is.î            

ìIt will seem nothing to you. Such whims are only impressive as we originatethem, I think; they are not to be communicated. I have sometimes sat alone hereof an evening, listening, until I have made the echoes out to be the echoes ofall the footsteps that are coming by-and-bye into our lives.î            

ìThere is a great crowd coming one day into our lives, if that be so,î SydneyCarton struck in, in his moody way.            

The footsteps were incessant, and the hurry of them became more and morerapid. The corner echoed and re-echoed with the tread of feet; some, as itseemed, under the windows; some, as it seemed, in the room; some coming, somegoing, some breaking off, some stopping altogether; all in the distant streets,and not one within sight.            

ìAre all these footsteps destined to come to all of us, Miss Manette, or arewe to divide them among us?î            

ìI donít know, Mr. Darnay; I told you it was a foolish fancy, but you askedfor it. When I have yielded myself to it, I have been alone, and then I haveimagined them the footsteps of the people who are to come into my life, and myfatherís.î            

ìI take them into mine!î said Carton. ìI ask no questions andmake no stipulations. There is a great crowd bearing down upon us, Miss Manette,and I see themóby the Lightning.î He added the last words, after there had beena vivid flash which had shown him lounging in the window.            

ìAnd I hear them!î he added again, after a peal of thunder. ìHere they come,fast, fierce, and furious!î            

It was the rush and roar of rain that he typified, and it stopped him, for novoice could be heard in it. A memorable storm of thunder and lightning brokewith that sweep of water, and there was not a momentís interval in crash, andfire, and rain, until after the moon rose at midnight.            

The great bell of Saint Paulís was striking one in the cleared air, when Mr.Lorry, escorted by Jerry, high-booted and bearing a lantern, set forth on hisreturn-passage to Clerkenwell. There were solitary patches of road on the waybetween Soho and Clerkenwell, and Mr. Lorry, mindful of foot-pads, alwaysretained Jerry for this service: though it was usually performed a good twohours earlier.            

ìWhat a night it has been! Almost a night, Jerry,î said Mr. Lorry, ìto bringthe dead out of their graves.î            

ìI never see the night myself, masterónor yet I donít expect toówhat would dothat,î answered Jerry.            

ìGood night, Mr. Carton,î said the man of business. ìGood night, Mr. Darnay.Shall we ever see such a night again, together!î            

Perhaps. Perhaps, see the great crowd of people with its rush and roar,bearing down upon them, too.            

Monseigneur, one of the great lords in power at the Court, held hisfortnightly reception in his grand hotel in Paris. Monseigneur was in his innerroom, his sanctuary of sanctuaries, the Holiest of Holiests to the crowd ofworshippers in the suite of rooms without. Monseigneur was about to take hischocolate. Monseigneur could swallow a great many things with ease, and was bysome few sullen minds supposed to be rather rapidly swallowing France; but, hismorningís chocolate could not so much as get into the throat of Monseigneur,without the aid of four strong men besides the Cook.            

Yes. It took four men, all four ablaze with gorgeous decoration, and the Chiefof them unable to exist with fewer than two gold watches in his pocket,emulative of the noble and chaste fashion set by Monseigneur, to conduct thehappy chocolate to Monseigneurís lips. One lacquey carried the chocolate-potinto the sacred presence; a second, milled and frothed the chocolate with thelittle instrument he bore for that function; a third, presented the favourednapkin; a fourth (he of the two gold watches), poured the chocolate out. It wasimpossible for Monseigneur to dispense with one of these attendants on thechocolate and hold his high place under the admiring Heavens. Deep would havebeen the blot upon his escutcheon if his chocolate had been ignobly waited on byonly three men; he must have died of two.            

Monseigneur had been out at a little supper last night, where the Comedy andthe Grand Opera were charmingly represented. Monseigneur was out at a littlesupper most nights, with fascinating company. So polite and so impressible wasMonseigneur, that the Comedy and the Grand Opera had far more influence with himin the tiresome articles of state affairs and state secrets, than the needs ofall France. A happy circumstance for France, as the like always is for allcountries similarly favoured!óalways was for England (by way of example), in theregretted days of the merry Stuart who sold it.            

Monseigneur had one truly noble idea of general public business, which was, tolet everything go on in its own way; of particular public business, Monseigneurhad the other truly noble idea that it must all go his wayótend to his own powerand pocket. Of his pleasures, general and particular, Monseigneur had the othertruly noble idea, that the world was made for them. The text of his order(altered from the original by only a pronoun, which is not much) ran: ìThe earthand the fulness thereof are mine, saith Monseigneur.î            

Yet, Monseigneur had slowly found that vulgar embarrassments crept into hisaffairs, both private and public; and he had, as to both classes of affairs,allied himself perforce with a Farmer-General. As to finances public, becauseMonseigneur could not make anything at all of them, and must consequently letthem out to somebody who could; as to finances private, because Farmer-Generalswere rich, and Monseigneur, after generations of great luxury and expense, wasgrowing poor. Hence Monseigneur had taken his sister from a convent, while therewas yet time to ward off the impending veil, the cheapest garment she couldwear, and had bestowed her as a prize upon a very rich Farmer-General, poor infamily. Which Farmer-General, carrying an appropriate cane with a golden appleon the top of it, was now among the company in the outer rooms, much prostratedbefore by mankindóalways excepting superior mankind of the blood of Monseigneur,who, his own wife included, looked down upon him with the loftiestcontempt.            

A sumptuous man was the Farmer-General. Thirty horses stood in his stables,twenty-four male domestics sat in his halls, six body-women waited on his wife.As one who pretended to do nothing but plunder and forage where he could, theFarmer-Generalóhowsoever his matrimonial relations conduced to socialmoralityówas at least the greatest reality among the personages who attended atthe hotel of Monseigneur that day.            

For, the rooms, though a beautiful scene to look at, and adorned with everydevice of decoration that the taste and skill of the time could achieve, were,in truth, not a sound business; considered with any reference to the scarecrowsin the rags and nightcaps elsewhere (and not so far off, either, but that thewatching towers of Notre Dame, almost equidistant from the two extremes, couldsee them both), they would have been an exceedingly uncomfortable businessóifthat could have been anybodyís business, at the house of Monseigneur. Militaryofficers destitute of military knowledge; naval officers with no idea of a ship;civil officers without a notion of affairs; brazen ecclesiastics, of the worstworld worldly, with sensual eyes, loose tongues, and looser lives; all totallyunfit for their several callings, all lying horribly in pretending to belong tothem, but all nearly or remotely of the order of Monseigneur, and thereforefoisted on all public employments from which anything was to be got; these wereto be told off by the score and the score. People not immediately connected withMonseigneur or the State, yet equally unconnected with anything that was real,or with lives passed in travelling by any straight road to any true earthly end,were no less abundant. Doctors who made great fortunes out of dainty remediesfor imaginary disorders that never existed, smiled upon their courtly patientsin the ante-chambers of Monseigneur. Projectors who had discovered every kind ofremedy for the little evils with which the State was touched, except the remedyof setting to work in earnest to root out a single sin, poured their distractingbabble into any ears they could lay hold of, at the reception of Monseigneur.Unbelieving Philosophers who were remodelling the world with words, and makingcard-towers of Babel to scale the skies with, talked with Unbelieving Chemistswho had an eye on the transmutation of metals, at this wonderful gatheringaccumulated by Monseigneur.             

Exquisite gentlemen of the finest breeding, which was at that remarkabletimeóand has been sinceóto be known by its fruits of indifference to everynatural subject of human interest, were in the most exemplary state ofexhaustion, at the hotel of Monseigneur. Such homes had these variousnotabilities left behind them in the fine world of Paris, that the spies amongthe assembled devotees of Monseigneuróforming a goodly half of the politecompanyówould have found it hard to discover among the angels of that sphere onesolitary wife, who, in her manners and appearance, owned to being a Mother.Indeed, except for the mere act of bringing a troublesome creature into thisworldówhich does not go far towards the realisation of the name of motherótherewas no such thing known to the fashion. Peasant women kept the unfashionablebabies close, and brought them up, and charming grandmammas of sixty dressed andsupped as at twenty.            

The leprosy of unreality disfigured every human creature in attendance uponMonseigneur. In the outermost room were half a dozen exceptional people who hadhad, for a few years, some vague misgiving in them that things in general weregoing rather wrong. As a promising way of setting them right, half of thehalf-dozen had become members of a fantastic sect of Convulsionists, and wereeven then considering within themselves whether they should foam, rage, roar,and turn cataleptic on the spotóthereby setting up a highly intelligiblefinger-post to the Future, for Monseigneurís guidance. Besides these Dervishes,were other three who had rushed into another sect, which mended matters with ajargon about ìthe Centre of Truth:î holding that Man had got out of the Centreof Truthówhich did not need much demonstrationóbut had not got out of theCircumference, and that he was to be kept from flying out of the Circumference,and was even to be shoved back into the Centre, by fasting and seeing ofspirits. Among these, accordingly, much discoursing with spirits went onóand itdid a world of good which never became manifest.            

But, the comfort was, that all the company at the grand hotel of Monseigneurwere perfectly dressed. If the Day of Judgment had only been ascertained to be adress day, everybody there would have been eternally correct. Such frizzling andpowdering and sticking up of hair, such delicate complexions artificiallypreserved and mended, such gallant swords to look at, and such delicate honourto the sense of smell, would surely keep anything going, for ever and ever. Theexquisite gentlemen of the finest breeding wore little pendent trinkets thatchinked as they languidly moved; these golden fetters rang like precious littlebells; and what with that ringing, and with the rustle of silk and brocade andfine linen, there was a flutter in the air that fanned Saint Antoine and hisdevouring hunger far away.            

Dress was the one unfailing talisman and charm used for keeping all things intheir places. Everybody was dressed for a Fancy Ball that was never to leaveoff. From the Palace of the Tuileries, through Monseigneur and the whole Court,through the Chambers, the Tribunals of Justice, and all society (except thescarecrows), the Fancy Ball descended to the Common Executioner: who, inpursuance of the charm, was required to officiate ìfrizzled, powdered, in agold-laced coat, pumps, and white silk stockings.î At the gallows and thewheelóthe axe was a rarityóMonsieur Paris, as it was the episcopal mode amonghis brother Professors of the provinces, Monsieur Orleans, and the rest, to callhim, presided in this dainty dress. And who among the company at Monseigneurísreception in that seventeen hundred and eightieth year of our Lord, couldpossibly doubt, that a system rooted in a frizzled hangman, powdered,gold-laced, pumped, and white-silk stockinged, would see the very starsout!            

Monseigneur having eased his four men of their burdens and taken hischocolate, caused the doors of the Holiest of Holiests to be thrown open, andissued forth. Then, what submission, what cringing and fawning, what servility,what abject humiliation! As to bowing down in body and spirit, nothing in thatway was left for Heavenówhich may have been one among other reasons why theworshippers of Monseigneur never troubled it.            

Bestowing a word of promise here and a smile there, a whisper on one happyslave and a wave of the hand on another, Monseigneur affably passed through hisrooms to the remote region of the Circumference of Truth. There, Monseigneurturned, and came back again, and so in due course of time got himself shut up inhis sanctuary by the chocolate sprites, and was seen no more.            

The show being over, the flutter in the air became quite a little storm, andthe precious little bells went ringing downstairs. There was soon but one personleft of all the crowd, and he, with his hat under his arm and his snuff-box inhis hand, slowly passed among the mirrors on his way out.            

ìI devote you,î said this person, stopping at the last door on his way, andturning in the direction of the sanctuary, ìto the Devil!î            

With that, he shook the snuff from his fingers as if he had shaken the dustfrom his feet, and quietly walked downstairs.            

He was a man of about sixty, handsomely dressed, haughty in manner, and with aface like a fine mask. A face of a transparent paleness; every feature in itclearly defined; one set expression on it. The nose, beautifully formedotherwise, was very slightly pinched at the top of each nostril. In those twocompressions, or dints, the only little change that the face ever showed,resided. They persisted in changing colour sometimes, and they would beoccasionally dilated and contracted by something like a faint pulsation; then,they gave a look of treachery, and cruelty, to the whole countenance. Examinedwith attention, its capacity of helping such a look was to be found in the lineof the mouth, and the lines of the orbits of the eyes, being much too horizontaland thin; still, in the effect of the face made, it was a handsome face, and aremarkable one.            

Its owner went downstairs into the courtyard, got into his carriage, and droveaway. Not many people had talked with him at the reception; he had stood in alittle space apart, and Monseigneur might have been warmer in his manner. Itappeared, under the circumstances, rather agreeable to him to see the commonpeople dispersed before his horses, and often barely escaping from being rundown. His man drove as if he were charging an enemy, and the furiousrecklessness of the man brought no check into the face, or to the lips, of themaster. The complaint had sometimes made itself audible, even in that deaf cityand dumb age, that, in the narrow streets without footways, the fierce patriciancustom of hard driving endangered and maimed the mere vulgar in a barbarousmanner. But, few cared enough for that to think of it a second time, and, inthis matter, as in all others, the common wretches were left to get out of theirdifficulties as they could.            

With a wild rattle and clatter, and an inhuman abandonment of considerationnot easy to be understood in these days, the carriage dashed through streets andswept round corners, with women screaming before it, and men clutching eachother and clutching children out of its way. At last, swooping at a streetcorner by a fountain, one of its wheels came to a sickening little jolt, andthere was a loud cry from a number of voices, and the horses reared andplunged.            

But for the latter inconvenience, the carriage probably would not havestopped; carriages were often known to drive on, and leave their wounded behind,and why not? But the frightened valet had got down in a hurry, and there weretwenty hands at the horsesí bridles.            

ìWhat has gone wrong?î said Monsieur, calmly looking out.            

A tall man in a nightcap had caught up a bundle from among the feet of thehorses, and had laid it on the basement of the fountain, and was down in the mudand wet, howling over it like a wild animal.            

ìPardon, Monsieur the Marquis!î said a ragged and submissive man, ìit is achild.î            

ìWhy does he make that abominable noise? Is it his child?î            

ìExcuse me, Monsieur the Marquisóit is a pityóyes.î            

The fountain was a little removed; for the street opened, where it was, into aspace some ten or twelve yards square. As the tall man suddenly got up from theground, and came running at the carriage, Monsieur the Marquis clapped his handfor an instant on his sword-hilt.            

ìKilled!î shrieked the man, in wild desperation, extending both arms at theirlength above his head, and staring at him. ìDead!î            

The people closed round, and looked at Monsieur the Marquis. There was nothingrevealed by the many eyes that looked at him but watchfulness and eagerness;there was no visible menacing or anger. Neither did the people say anything;after the first cry, they had been silent, and they remained so. The voice ofthe submissive man who had spoken, was flat and tame in its extreme submission.Monsieur the Marquis ran his eyes over them all, as if they had been mere ratscome out of their holes.            

He took out his purse.            

ìIt is extraordinary to me,î said he, ìthat you people cannot take care ofyourselves and your children. One or the other of you is for ever in the way.How do I know what injury you have done my horses. See! Give him that.î            

He threw out a gold coin for the valet to pick up, and all the heads cranedforward that all the eyes might look down at it as it fell. The tall man calledout again with a most unearthly cry, ìDead!î            

He was arrested by the quick arrival of another man, for whom the rest madeway. On seeing him, the miserable creature fell upon his shoulder, sobbing andcrying, and pointing to the fountain, where some women were stooping over themotionless bundle, and moving gently about it. They were as silent, however, asthe men.            

ìI know all, I know all,î said the last comer. ìBe a brave man, my Gaspard! Itis better for the poor little plaything to die so, than to live. It has died ina moment without pain. Could it have lived an hour as happily?î            

ìYou are a philosopher, you there,î said the Marquis, smiling. ìHow do theycall you?î            

ìThey call me Defarge.î            

ìOf what trade?î            

ìMonsieur the Marquis, vendor of wine.î            

ìPick up that, philosopher and vendor of wine,î said the Marquis, throwing himanother gold coin, ìand spend it as you will. The horses there; are theyright?î            

Without deigning to look at the assemblage a second time, Monsieur the Marquisleaned back in his seat, and was just being driven away with the air of agentleman who had accidentally broke some common thing, and had paid for it, andcould afford to pay for it; when his ease was suddenly disturbed by a coinflying into his carriage, and ringing on its floor.            

ìHold!î said Monsieur the Marquis. ìHold the horses! Who threw that?î            

He looked to the spot where Defarge the vendor of wine had stood, a momentbefore; but the wretched father was grovelling on his face on the pavement inthat spot, and the figure that stood beside him was the figure of a dark stoutwoman, knitting.            

ìYou dogs!î said the Marquis, but smoothly, and with an unchanged front,except as to the spots on his nose: ìI would ride over any of you verywillingly, and exterminate you from the earth. If I knew which rascal threw atthe carriage, and if that brigand were sufficiently near it, he should becrushed under the wheels.î            

So cowed was their condition, and so long and hard their experience of whatsuch a man could do to them, within the law and beyond it, that not a voice, ora hand, or even an eye was raised. Among the men, not one. But the woman whostood knitting looked up steadily, and looked the Marquis in the face. It wasnot for his dignity to notice it; his contemptuous eyes passed over her, andover all the other rats; and he leaned back in his seat again, and gave the wordìGo on!î            

He was driven on, and other carriages came whirling by in quick succession;the Minister, the State-Projector, the Farmer-General, the Doctor, the Lawyer,the Ecclesiastic, the Grand Opera, the Comedy, the whole Fancy Ball in a brightcontinuous flow, came whirling by. The rats had crept out of their holes to lookon, and they remained looking on for hours; soldiers and police often passingbetween them and the spectacle, and making a barrier behind which they slunk,and through which they peeped. The father had long ago taken up his bundle andbidden himself away with it, when the women who had tended the bundle while itlay on the base of the fountain, sat there watching the running of the water andthe rolling of the Fancy Ballówhen the one woman who had stood conspicuous,knitting, still knitted on with the steadfastness of Fate. The water of thefountain ran, the swift river ran, the day ran into evening, so much life in thecity ran into death according to rule, time and tide waited for no man, the ratswere sleeping close together in their dark holes again, the Fancy Ball waslighted up at supper, all things ran their course.            

A beautiful landscape, with the corn bright in it, but not abundant. Patchesof poor rye where corn should have been, patches of poor peas and beans, patchesof most coarse vegetable substitutes for wheat. On inanimate nature, as on themen and women who cultivated it, a prevalent tendency towards an appearance ofvegetating unwillinglyóa dejected disposition to give up, and witheraway.            

Monsieur the Marquis in his travelling carriage (which might have beenlighter), conducted by four post-horses and two postilions, fagged up a steephill. A blush on the countenance of Monsieur the Marquis was no impeachment ofhis high breeding; it was not from within; it was occasioned by an externalcircumstance beyond his controlóthe setting sun.            

The sunset struck so brilliantly into the travelling carriage when it gainedthe hill-top, that its occupant was steeped in crimson. ìIt will die out,î saidMonsieur the Marquis, glancing at his hands, ìdirectly.î            

In effect, the sun was so low that it dipped at the moment. When the heavydrag had been adjusted to the wheel, and the carriage slid down hill, with acinderous smell, in a cloud of dust, the red glow departed quickly; the sun andthe Marquis going down together, there was no glow left when the drag was takenoff.            

But, there remained a broken country, bold and open, a little village at thebottom of the hill, a broad sweep and rise beyond it, a church-tower, awindmill, a forest for the chase, and a crag with a fortress on it used as aprison. Round upon all these darkening objects as the night drew on, the Marquislooked, with the air of one who was coming near home.            

The village had its one poor street, with its poor brewery, poor tannery, poortavern, poor stable-yard for relays of post-horses, poor fountain, all usualpoor appointments. It had its poor people too. All its people were poor, andmany of them were sitting at their doors, shredding spare onions and the likefor supper, while many were at the fountain, washing leaves, and grasses, andany such small yieldings of the earth that could be eaten. Expressive sips ofwhat made them poor, were not wanting; the tax for the state, the tax for thechurch, the tax for the lord, tax local and tax general, were to be paid hereand to be paid there, according to solemn inscription in the little village,until the wonder was, that there was any village left unswallowed.            

Few children were to be seen, and no dogs. As to the men and women, theirchoice on earth was stated in the prospectóLife on the lowest terms that couldsustain it, down in the little village under the mill; or captivity and Death inthe dominant prison on the crag.            

Heralded by a courier in advance, and by the cracking of his postilionsíwhips, which twined snake-like about their heads in the evening air, as if hecame attended by the Furies, Monsieur the Marquis drew up in his travellingcarriage at the posting-house gate. It was hard by the fountain, and thepeasants suspended their operations to look at him. He looked at them, and sawin them, without knowing it, the slow sure filing down of misery-worn face andfigure, that was to make the meagreness of Frenchmen an English superstitionwhich should survive the truth through the best part of a hundred years.            

Monsieur the Marquis cast his eyes over the submissive faces that droopedbefore him, as the like of himself had drooped before Monseigneur of theCourtóonly the difference was, that these faces drooped merely to suffer and notto propitiateówhen a grizzled mender of the roads joined the group.            

ìBring me hither that fellow!î said the Marquis to the courier.            

The fellow was brought, cap in hand, and the other fellows closed round tolook and listen, in the manner of the people at the Paris fountain.            

ìI passed you on the road?î            

ìMonseigneur, it is true. I had the honour of being passed on theroad.î            

ìComing up the hill, and at the top of the hill, both?î            

ìMonseigneur, it is true.î            

ìWhat did you look at, so fixedly?î            

ìMonseigneur, I looked at the man.î            

He stooped a little, and with his tattered blue cap pointed under thecarriage. All his fellows stooped to look under the carriage.            

ìWhat man, pig? And why look there?î            

ìPardon, Monseigneur; he swung by the chain of the shoeóthe drag.î            

ìWho?î demanded the traveller.            

ìMonseigneur, the man.î            

ìMay the Devil carry away these idiots! How do you call the man? You know allthe men of this part of the country. Who was he?î            

ìYour clemency, Monseigneur! He was not of this part of the country. Of allthe days of my life, I never saw him.î            

ìSwinging by the chain? To be suffocated?î            

ìWith your gracious permission, that was the wonder of it, Monseigneur. Hishead hanging overólike this!î            

He turned himself sideways to the carriage, and leaned back, with his facethrown up to the sky, and his head hanging down; then recovered himself, fumbledwith his cap, and made a bow.            

ìWhat was he like?î            

ìMonseigneur, he was whiter than the miller. All covered with dust, white as aspectre, tall as a spectre!î            

The picture produced an immense sensation in the little crowd; but all eyes,without comparing notes with other eyes, looked at Monsieur the Marquis.Perhaps, to observe whether he had any spectre on his conscience.            

ìTruly, you did well,î said the Marquis, felicitously sensible that suchvermin were not to ruffle him, ìto see a thief accompanying my carriage, and notopen that great mouth of yours. Bah! Put him aside, Monsieur Gabelle!î            

Monsieur Gabelle was the Postmaster, and some other taxing functionary united;he had come out with great obsequiousness to assist at this examination, and hadheld the examined by the drapery of his arm in an official manner.            

ìBah! Go aside!î said Monsieur Gabelle.            

ìLay hands on this stranger if he seeks to lodge in your village to-night, andbe sure that his business is honest, Gabelle.î            

ìMonseigneur, I am flattered to devote myself to your orders.î            

ìDid he run away, fellow?ówhere is that Accursed?î            

The accursed was already under the carriage with some half-dozen particularfriends, pointing out the chain with his blue cap. Some half-dozen otherparticular friends promptly hauled him out, and presented him breathless toMonsieur the Marquis.            

ìDid the man run away, Dolt, when we stopped for the drag?î            

ìMonseigneur, he precipitated himself over the hill-side, head first, as aperson plunges into the river.î            

ìSee to it, Gabelle. Go on!î            

The half-dozen who were peering at the chain were still among the wheels, likesheep; the wheels turned so suddenly that they were lucky to save their skinsand bones; they had very little else to save, or they might not have been sofortunate.            

The burst with which the carriage started out of the village and up the risebeyond, was soon checked by the steepness of the hill. Gradually, it subsided toa foot pace, swinging and lumbering upward among the many sweet scents of asummer night. The postilions, with a thousand gossamer gnats circling about themin lieu of the Furies, quietly mended the points to the lashes of their whips;the valet walked by the horses; the courier was audible, trotting on ahead intothe dun distance.            

At the steepest point of the hill there was a little burial-ground, with aCross and a new large figure of Our Saviour on it; it was a poor figure in wood,done by some inexperienced rustic carver, but he had studied the figure from thelifeóhis own life, maybeófor it was dreadfully spare and thin.            

To this distressful emblem of a great distress that had long been growingworse, and was not at its worst, a woman was kneeling. She turned her head asthe carriage came up to her, rose quickly, and presented herself at thecarriage-door.            

ìIt is you, Monseigneur! Monseigneur, a petition.î            

With an exclamation of impatience, but with his unchangeable face, Monseigneurlooked out.            

ìHow, then! What is it? Always petitions!î            

ìMonseigneur. For the love of the great God! My husband, the forester.î            

ìWhat of your husband, the forester? Always the same with you people. Hecannot pay something?î            

ìHe has paid all, Monseigneur. He is dead.î            

ìWell! He is quiet. Can I restore him to you?î            

ìAlas, no, Monseigneur! But he lies yonder, under a little heap of poorgrass.î            

ìWell?î            

ìMonseigneur, there are so many little heaps of poor grass?î            

ìAgain, well?î            

She looked an old woman, but was young. Her manner was one of passionategrief; by turns she clasped her veinous and knotted hands together with wildenergy, and laid one of them on the carriage-doorótenderly, caressingly, as ifit had been a human breast, and could be expected to feel the appealingtouch.            

ìMonseigneur, hear me! Monseigneur, hear my petition! My husband died of want;so many die of want; so many more will die of want.î            

ìAgain, well? Can I feed them?î            

ìMonseigneur, the good God knows; but I donít ask it. My petition is, that amorsel of stone or wood, with my husbandís name, may be placed over him to showwhere he lies. Otherwise, the place will be quickly forgotten, it will never befound when I am dead of the same malady, I shall be laid under some other heapof poor grass. Monseigneur, they are so many, they increase so fast, there is somuch want. Monseigneur! Monseigneur!î            

The valet had put her away from the door, the carriage had broken into a brisktrot, the postilions had quickened the pace, she was left far behind, andMonseigneur, again escorted by the Furies, was rapidly diminishing the league ortwo of distance that remained between him and his chateau.            

The sweet scents of the summer night rose all around him, and rose, as therain falls, impartially, on the dusty, ragged, and toil-worn group at thefountain not far away; to whom the mender of roads, with the aid of the blue capwithout which he was nothing, still enlarged upon his man like a spectre, aslong as they could bear it. By degrees, as they could bear no more, they droppedoff one by one, and lights twinkled in little casements; which lights, as thecasements darkened, and more stars came out, seemed to have shot up into the skyinstead of having been extinguished.            

The shadow of a large high-roofed house, and of many over-hanging trees, wasupon Monsieur the Marquis by that time; and the shadow was exchanged for thelight of a flambeau, as his carriage stopped, and the great door of his chateauwas opened to him.            

ìMonsieur Charles, whom I expect; is he arrived from England?î            

ìMonseigneur, not yet.î            

It was a heavy mass of building, that chateau of Monsieur the Marquis, with alarge stone courtyard before it, and two stone sweeps of staircase meeting in astone terrace before the principal door. A stony business altogether, with heavystone balustrades, and stone urns, and stone flowers, and stone faces of men,and stone heads of lions, in all directions. As if the Gorgonís head hadsurveyed it, when it was finished, two centuries ago.            

Up the broad flight of shallow steps, Monsieur the Marquis, flambeau preceded,went from his carriage, sufficiently disturbing the darkness to elicit loudremonstrance from an owl in the roof of the great pile of stable building awayamong the trees. All else was so quiet, that the flambeau carried up the steps,and the other flambeau held at the great door, burnt as if they were in a closeroom of state, instead of being in the open night-air. Other sound than theowlís voice there was none, save the failing of a fountain into its stone basin;for, it was one of those dark nights that hold their breath by the hourtogether, and then heave a long low sigh, and hold their breath again.            

The great door clanged behind him, and Monsieur the Marquis crossed a hallgrim with certain old boar-spears, swords, and knives of the chase; grimmer withcertain heavy riding-rods and riding-whips, of which many a peasant, gone to hisbenefactor Death, had felt the weight when his lord was angry.            

Avoiding the larger rooms, which were dark and made fast for the night,Monsieur the Marquis, with his flambeau-bearer going on before, went up thestaircase to a door in a corridor. This thrown open, admitted him to his ownprivate apartment of three rooms: his bed-chamber and two others. High vaultedrooms with cool uncarpeted floors, great dogs upon the hearths for the burningof wood in winter time, and all luxuries befitting the state of a marquis in aluxurious age and country. The fashion of the last Louis but one, of the linethat was never to breakóthe fourteenth Louisówas conspicuous in their richfurniture; but, it was diversified by many objects that were illustrations ofold pages in the history of France.            

A supper-table was laid for two, in the third of the rooms; a round room, inone of the chateauís four extinguisher-topped towers. A small lofty room, withits window wide open, and the wooden jalousie-blinds closed, so that the darknight only showed in slight horizontal lines of black, alternating with theirbroad lines of stone colour.            

ìMy nephew,î said the Marquis, glancing at the supper preparation; ìthey saidhe was not arrived.î            

Nor was he; but, he had been expected with Monseigneur.            

ìAh! It is not probable he will arrive to-night; nevertheless, leave the tableas it is. I shall be ready in a quarter of an hour.î            

In a quarter of an hour Monseigneur was ready, and sat down alone to hissumptuous and choice supper. His chair was opposite to the window, and he hadtaken his soup, and was raising his glass of Bordeaux to his lips, when he putit down.            

ìWhat is that?î he calmly asked, looking with attention at the horizontallines of black and stone colour.            

ìMonseigneur? That?î            

ìOutside the blinds. Open the blinds.î            

It was done.            

ìWell?î            

ìMonseigneur, it is nothing. The trees and the night are all that arehere.î            

The servant who spoke, had thrown the blinds wide, had looked out into thevacant darkness, and stood with that blank behind him, looking round forinstructions.            

ìGood,î said the imperturbable master. ìClose them again.î            

That was done too, and the Marquis went on with his supper. He was half waythrough it, when he again stopped with his glass in his hand, hearing the soundof wheels. It came on briskly, and came up to the front of the chateau.            

ìAsk who is arrived.î            

It was the nephew of Monseigneur. He had been some few leagues behindMonseigneur, early in the afternoon. He had diminished the distance rapidly, butnot so rapidly as to come up with Monseigneur on the road. He had heard ofMonseigneur, at the posting-houses, as being before him.            

He was to be told (said Monseigneur) that supper awaited him then and there,and that he was prayed to come to it. In a little while he came. He had beenknown in England as Charles Darnay.            

Monseigneur received him in a courtly manner, but they did not shakehands.            

ìYou left Paris yesterday, sir?î he said to Monseigneur, as he took his seatat table.            

ìYesterday. And you?î            

ìI come direct.î            

ìFrom London?î            

ìYes.î            

ìYou have been a long time coming,î said the Marquis, with a smile.            

ìOn the contrary; I come direct.î            

ìPardon me! I mean, not a long time on the journey; a long time intending thejourney.î            

ìI have been detained byîóthe nephew stopped a moment in his answeróîvariousbusiness.î            

ìWithout doubt,î said the polished uncle.            

So long as a servant was present, no other words passed between them. Whencoffee had been served and they were alone together, the nephew, looking at theuncle and meeting the eyes of the face that was like a fine mask, opened aconversation.            

ìI have come back, sir, as you anticipate, pursuing the object that took meaway. It carried me into great and unexpected peril; but it is a sacred object,and if it had carried me to death I hope it would have sustained me.î            

ìNot to death,î said the uncle; ìit is not necessary to say, to death.î            

ìI doubt, sir,î returned the nephew, ìwhether, if it had carried me to theutmost brink of death, you would have cared to stop me there.î            

The deepened marks in the nose, and the lengthening of the fine straight linesin the cruel face, looked ominous as to that; the uncle made a graceful gestureof protest, which was so clearly a slight form of good breeding that it was notreassuring.            

ìIndeed, sir,î pursued the nephew, ìfor anything I know, you may haveexpressly worked to give a more suspicious appearance to the suspiciouscircumstances that surrounded me.î            

ìNo, no, no,î said the uncle, pleasantly.            

ìBut, however that may be,î resumed the nephew, glancing at him with deepdistrust, ìI know that your diplomacy would stop me by any means, and would knowno scruple as to means.î            

ìMy friend, I told you so,î said the uncle, with a fine pulsation in the twomarks. ìDo me the favour to recall that I told you so, long ago.î            

ìI recall it.î            

ìThank you,î said the Marquiseóvery sweetly indeed.            

His tone lingered in the air, almost like the tone of a musicalinstrument.            

ìIn effect, sir,î pursued the nephew, ìI believe it to be at once your badfortune, and my good fortune, that has kept me out of a prison in Francehere.î            

ìI do not quite understand,î returned the uncle, sipping his coffee. ìDare Iask you to explain?î            

ìI believe that if you were not in disgrace with the Court, and had not beenovershadowed by that cloud for years past, a letter de cachet would have sent meto some fortress indefinitely.î            

ìIt is possible,î said the uncle, with great calmness. ìFor the honour of thefamily, I could even resolve to incommode you to that extent. Pray excuseme!î            

ìI perceive that, happily for me, the Reception of the day before yesterdaywas, as usual, a cold one,î observed the nephew.            

ìI would not say happily, my friend,î returned the uncle, with refinedpoliteness; ìI would not be sure of that. A good opportunity for consideration,surrounded by the advantages of solitude, might influence your destiny to fargreater advantage than you influence it for yourself. But it is useless todiscuss the question. I am, as you say, at a disadvantage. These littleinstruments of correction, these gentle aids to the power and honour offamilies, these slight favours that might so incommode you, are only to beobtained now by interest and importunity. They are sought by so many, and theyare granted (comparatively) to so few! It used not to be so, but France in allsuch things is changed for the worse. Our not remote ancestors held the right oflife and death over the surrounding vulgar. From this room, many such dogs havebeen taken out to be hanged; in the next room (my bedroom), one fellow, to ourknowledge, was poniarded on the spot for professing some insolent delicacyrespecting his daughteróhis daughter? We have lost manyprivileges; a new philosophy has become the mode; and the assertion of ourstation, in these days, might (I do not go so far as to say would, but might)cause us real inconvenience. All very bad, very bad!î            

The Marquis took a gentle little pinch of snuff, and shook his head; aselegantly despondent as he could becomingly be of a country still containinghimself, that great means of regeneration.            

ìWe have so asserted our station, both in the old time and in the modern timealso,î said the nephew, gloomily, ìthat I believe our name to be more detestedthan any name in France.î            

ìLet us hope so,î said the uncle. ìDetestation of the high is the involuntaryhomage of the low.î            

ìThere is not,î pursued the nephew, in his former tone, ìa face I can look at,in all this country round about us, which looks at me with any deference on itbut the dark deference of fear and slavery.î            

ìA compliment,î said the Marquis, ìto the grandeur of the family, merited bythe manner in which the family has sustained its grandeur. Hah!î And he tookanother gentle little pinch of snuff, and lightly crossed his legs.            

But, when his nephew, leaning an elbow on the table, covered his eyesthoughtfully and dejectedly with his hand, the fine mask looked at him sidewayswith a stronger concentration of keenness, closeness, and dislike, than wascomportable with its wearerís assumption of indifference.            

ìRepression is the only lasting philosophy. The dark deference of fear andslavery, my friend,î observed the Marquis, ìwill keep the dogs obedient to thewhip, as long as this roof,î looking up to it, ìshuts out the sky.î            

That might not be so long as the Marquis supposed. If a picture of the chateauas it was to be a very few years hence, and of fifty like it as they too were tobe a very few years hence, could have been shown to him that night, he mighthave been at a loss to claim his own from the ghastly, fire-charred,plunder-wrecked rains. As for the roof he vaunted, he might have found THATshutting out the sky in a new wayóto wit, for ever, from the eyes of the bodiesinto which its lead was fired, out of the barrels of a hundred thousandmuskets.            

ìMeanwhile,î said the Marquis, ìI will preserve the honour and repose of thefamily, if you will not. But you must be fatigued. Shall we terminate ourconference for the night?î            

ìA moment more.î            

ìAn hour, if you please.î            

ìSir,î said the nephew, ìwe have done wrong, and are reaping the fruits ofwrong.î            

ìWE have done wrong?î repeated the Marquis, with an inquiring smile, anddelicately pointing, first to his nephew, then to himself.            

ìOur family; our honourable family, whose honour is of so much account to bothof us, in such different ways. Even in my fatherís time, we did a world ofwrong, injuring every human creature who came between us and our pleasure,whatever it was. Why need I speak of my fatherís time, when it is equally yours?Can I separate my fatherís twin-brother, joint inheritor, and next successor,from himself?î            

ìDeath has done that!î said the Marquis.            

ìAnd has left me,î answered the nephew, ìbound to a system that is frightfulto me, responsible for it, but powerless in it; seeking to execute the lastrequest of my dear motherís lips, and obey the last look of my dear motheríseyes, which implored me to have mercy and to redress; and tortured by seekingassistance and power in vain.î            

ìSeeking them from me, my nephew,î said the Marquis, touching him on thebreast with his forefingeróthey were now standing by the hearthóîyou will forever seek them in vain, be assured.î            

Every fine straight line in the clear whiteness of his face, was cruelly,craftily, and closely compressed, while he stood looking quietly at his nephew,with his snuff-box in his hand. Once again he touched him on the breast, asthough his finger were the fine point of a small sword, with which, in delicatefinesse, he ran him through the body, and said,             

ìMy friend, I will die, perpetuating the system under which I havelived.î            

When he had said it, he took a culminating pinch of snuff, and put his box inhis pocket.            

ìBetter to be a rational creature,î he added then, after ringing a small bellon the table, ìand accept your natural destiny. But you are lost, MonsieurCharles, I see.î            

ìThis property and France are lost to me,î said the nephew, sadly; ìI renouncethem.î            

ìAre they both yours to renounce? France may be, but is the property? It isscarcely worth mentioning; but, is it yet?î            

ìI had no intention, in the words I used, to claim it yet. If it passed to mefrom you, to-morrowóî            

ìWhich I have the vanity to hope is not probable.î            

ìóor twenty years henceóî            

ìYou do me too much honour,î said the Marquis; ìstill, I prefer thatsupposition.î            

ìóI would abandon it, and live otherwise and elsewhere. It is little torelinquish. What is it but a wilderness of misery and ruin!î            

ìHah!î said the Marquis, glancing round the luxurious room.            

ìTo the eye it is fair enough, here; but seen in its integrity, under the sky,and by the daylight, it is a crumbling tower of waste, mismanagement, extortion,debt, mortgage, oppression, hunger, nakedness, and suffering.î            

ìHah!î said the Marquis again, in a well-satisfied manner.            

ìIf it ever becomes mine, it shall be put into some hands better qualified tofree it slowly (if such a thing is possible) from the weight that drags it down,so that the miserable people who cannot leave it and who have been long wrung tothe last point of endurance, may, in another generation, suffer less; but it isnot for me. There is a curse on it, and on all this land.î            

ìAnd you?î said the uncle. ìForgive my curiosity; do you, under your newphilosophy, graciously intend to live?î            

ìI must do, to live, what others of my countrymen, even with nobility at theirbacks, may have to do some dayówork.î            

ìIn England, for example?î            

ìYes. The family honour, sir, is safe from me in this country. The family namecan suffer from me in no other, for I bear it in no other.î            

The ringing of the bell had caused the adjoining bed-chamber to be lighted. Itnow shone brightly, through the door of communication. The Marquis looked thatway, and listened for the retreating step of his valet.            

ìEngland is very attractive to you, seeing how indifferently you haveprospered there,î he observed then, turning his calm face to his nephew with asmile.            

ìI have already said, that for my prospering there, I am sensible I may beindebted to you, sir. For the rest, it is my Refuge.î            

ìThey say, those boastful English, that it is the Refuge of many. You know acompatriot who has found a Refuge there? A Doctor?î            

ìYes.î            

ìWith a daughter?î            

ìYes.î            

ìYes,î said the Marquis. ìYou are fatigued. Good night!î            

As he bent his head in his most courtly manner, there was a secrecy in hissmiling face, and he conveyed an air of mystery to those words, which struck theeyes and ears of his nephew forcibly. At the same time, the thin straight linesof the setting of the eyes, and the thin straight lips, and the markings in thenose, curved with a sarcasm that looked handsomely diabolic.            

ìYes,î repeated the Marquis. ìA Doctor with a daughter. Yes. So commences thenew philosophy! You are fatigued. Good night!î            

It would have been of as much avail to interrogate any stone face outside thechateau as to interrogate that face of his. The nephew looked at him, in vain,in passing on to the door.            

ìGood night!î said the uncle. ìI look to the pleasure of seeing you again inthe morning. Good repose! Light Monsieur my nephew to his chamber there!óAndburn Monsieur my nephew in his bed, if you will,î he added to himself, before herang his little bell again, and summoned his valet to his own bedroom.            

The valet come and gone, Monsieur the Marquis walked to and fro in his loosechamber-robe, to prepare himself gently for sleep, that hot still night.Rustling about the room, his softly-slippered feet making no noise on the floor,he moved like a refined tiger:ólooked like some enchanted marquis of theimpenitently wicked sort, in story, whose periodical change into tiger form waseither just going off, or just coming on.            

He moved from end to end of his voluptuous bedroom, looking again at thescraps of the dayís journey that came unbidden into his mind; the slow toil upthe hill at sunset, the setting sun, the descent, the mill, the prison on thecrag, the little village in the hollow, the peasants at the fountain, and themender of roads with his blue cap pointing out the chain under the carriage.That fountain suggested the Paris fountain, the little bundle lying on the step,the women bending over it, and the tall man with his arms up, crying,ìDead!î            

ìI am cool now,î said Monsieur the Marquis, ìand may go to bed.î            

So, leaving only one light burning on the large hearth, he let his thin gauzecurtains fall around him, and heard the night break its silence with a long sighas he composed himself to sleep.            

The stone faces on the outer walls stared blindly at the black night for threeheavy hours; for three heavy hours, the horses in the stables rattled at theirracks, the dogs barked, and the owl made a noise with very little resemblance init to the noise conventionally assigned to the owl by men-poets. But it is theobstinate custom of such creatures hardly ever to say what is set down forthem.            

For three heavy hours, the stone faces of the chateau, lion and human, staredblindly at the night. Dead darkness lay on all the landscape, dead darknessadded its own hush to the hushing dust on all the roads. The burial-place hadgot to the pass that its little heaps of poor grass were undistinguishable fromone another; the figure on the Cross might have come down, for anything thatcould be seen of it. In the village, taxers and taxed were fast asleep.Dreaming, perhaps, of banquets, as the starved usually do, and of ease and rest,as the driven slave and the yoked ox may, its lean inhabitants slept soundly,and were fed and freed.            

The fountain in the village flowed unseen and unheard, and the fountain at thechateau dropped unseen and unheardóboth melting away, like the minutes that werefalling from the spring of Timeóthrough three dark hours. Then, the grey waterof both began to be ghostly in the light, and the eyes of the stone faces of thechateau were opened.            

Lighter and lighter, until at last the sun touched the tops of the stilltrees, and poured its radiance over the hill. In the glow, the water of thechateau fountain seemed to turn to blood, and the stone faces crimsoned. Thecarol of the birds was loud and high, and, on the weather-beaten sill of thegreat window of the bed-chamber of Monsieur the Marquis, one little bird sangits sweetest song with all its might. At this, the nearest stone face seemed tostare amazed, and, with open mouth and dropped under-jaw, lookedawe-stricken.            

Now, the sun was full up, and movement began in the village. Casement windowsopened, crazy doors were unbarred, and people came forth shiveringóchilled, asyet, by the new sweet air. Then began the rarely lightened toil of the day amongthe village population. Some, to the fountain; some, to the fields; men andwomen here, to dig and delve; men and women there, to see to the poor livestock, and lead the bony cows out, to such pasture as could be found by theroadside. In the church and at the Cross, a kneeling figure or two; attendant onthe latter prayers, the led cow, trying for a breakfast among the weeds at itsfoot.            

The chateau awoke later, as became its quality, but awoke gradually andsurely. First, the lonely boar-spears and knives of the chase had been reddenedas of old; then, had gleamed trenchant in the morning sunshine; now, doors andwindows were thrown open, horses in their stables looked round over theirshoulders at the light and freshness pouring in at doorways, leaves sparkled andrustled at iron-grated windows, dogs pulled hard at their chains, and rearedimpatient to be loosed.            

All these trivial incidents belonged to the routine of life, and the return ofmorning. Surely, not so the ringing of the great bell of the chateau, nor therunning up and down the stairs; nor the hurried figures on the terrace; nor thebooting and tramping here and there and everywhere, nor the quick saddling ofhorses and riding away?            

What winds conveyed this hurry to the grizzled mender of roads, already atwork on the hill-top beyond the village, with his dayís dinner (not much tocarry) lying in a bundle that it was worth no crowís while to peck at, on a heapof stones? Had the birds, carrying some grains of it to a distance, dropped oneover him as they sow chance seeds? Whether or no, the mender of roads ran, onthe sultry morning, as if for his life, down the hill, knee-high in dust, andnever stopped till he got to the fountain.            

All the people of the village were at the fountain, standing about in theirdepressed manner, and whispering low, but showing no other emotions than grimcuriosity and surprise. The led cows, hastily brought in and tethered toanything that would hold them, were looking stupidly on, or lying down chewingthe cud of nothing particularly repaying their trouble, which they had picked upin their interrupted saunter. Some of the people of the chateau, and some ofthose of the posting-house, and all the taxing authorities, were armed more orless, and were crowded on the other side of the little street in a purposelessway, that was highly fraught with nothing. Already, the mender of roads hadpenetrated into the midst of a group of fifty particular friends, and wassmiting himself in the breast with his blue cap. What did all this portend, andwhat portended the swift hoisting-up of Monsieur Gabelle behind a servant onhorseback, and the conveying away of the said Gabelle (double-laden though thehorse was), at a gallop, like a new version of the German ballad ofLeonora?            

It portended that there was one stone face too many, up at the chateau.            

The Gorgon had surveyed the building again in the night, and had added the onestone face wanting; the stone face for which it had waited through about twohundred years.            

It lay back on the pillow of Monsieur the Marquis. It was like a fine mask,suddenly startled, made angry, and petrified. Driven home into the heart of thestone figure attached to it, was a knife. Round its hilt was a frill of paper,on which was scrawled:            

ìDrive him fast to his tomb. This, from Jacques.î            

More months, to the number of twelve, had come and gone, and Mr. CharlesDarnay was established in England as a higher teacher of the French language whowas conversant with French literature. In this age, he would have been aProfessor; in that age, he was a Tutor. He read with young men who could findany leisure and interest for the study of a living tongue spoken all over theworld, and he cultivated a taste for its stores of knowledge and fancy. He couldwrite of them, besides, in sound English, and render them into sound English.Such masters were not at that time easily found; Princes that had been, andKings that were to be, were not yet of the Teacher class, and no ruined nobilityhad dropped out of Tellsonís ledgers, to turn cooks and carpenters. As a tutor,whose attainments made the studentís way unusually pleasant and profitable, andas an elegant translator who brought something to his work besides meredictionary knowledge, young Mr. Darnay soon became known and encouraged. He waswell acquainted, more-over, with the circumstances of his country, and thosewere of ever-growing interest. So, with great perseverance and untiringindustry, he prospered.            

In London, he had expected neither to walk on pavements of gold, nor to lie onbeds of roses; if he had had any such exalted expectation, he would not haveprospered. He had expected labour, and he found it, and did it and made the bestof it. In this, his prosperity consisted.            

A certain portion of his time was passed at Cambridge, where he read withundergraduates as a sort of tolerated smuggler who drove a contraband trade inEuropean languages, instead of conveying Greek and Latin through theCustom-house. The rest of his time he passed in London.            

Now, from the days when it was always summer in Eden, to these days when it ismostly winter in fallen latitudes, the world of a man has invariably gone onewayóCharles Darnayís wayóthe way of the love of a woman.            

He had loved Lucie Manette from the hour of his danger. He had never heard asound so sweet and dear as the sound of her compassionate voice; he had neverseen a face so tenderly beautiful, as hers when it was confronted with his ownon the edge of the grave that had been dug for him. But, he had not yet spokento her on the subject; the assassination at the deserted chateau far away beyondthe heaving water and the long, long, dusty roadsóthe solid stone chateau whichhad itself become the mere mist of a dreamóhad been done a year, and he hadnever yet, by so much as a single spoken word, disclosed to her the state of hisheart.            

That he had his reasons for this, he knew full well. It was again a summer daywhen, lately arrived in London from his college occupation, he turned into thequiet corner in Soho, bent on seeking an opportunity of opening his mind toDoctor Manette. It was the close of the summer day, and he knew Lucie to be outwith Miss Pross.            

He found the Doctor reading in his arm-chair at a window. The energy which hadat once supported him under his old sufferings and aggravated their sharpness,had been gradually restored to him. He was now a very energetic man indeed, withgreat firmness of purpose, strength of resolution, and vigour of action. In hisrecovered energy he was sometimes a little fitful and sudden, as he had at firstbeen in the exercise of his other recovered faculties; but, this had never beenfrequently observable, and had grown more and more rare.            

He studied much, slept little, sustained a great deal of fatigue with ease,and was equably cheerful. To him, now entered Charles Darnay, at sight of whomhe laid aside his book and held out his hand.            

ìCharles Darnay! I rejoice to see you. We have been counting on your returnthese three or four days past. Mr. Stryver and Sydney Carton were both hereyesterday, and both made you out to be more than due.î            

ìI am obliged to them for their interest in the matter,î he answered, a littlecoldly as to them, though very warmly as to the Doctor. ìMiss Manetteóî            

ìIs well,î said the Doctor, as he stopped short, ìand your return will delightus all. She has gone out on some household matters, but will soon behome.î            

ìDoctor Manette, I knew she was from home. I took the opportunity of her beingfrom home, to beg to speak to you.î            

There was a blank silence.            

ìYes?î said the Doctor, with evident constraint. ìBring your chair here, andspeak on.î            

He complied as to the chair, but appeared to find the speaking on lesseasy.            

ìI have had the happiness, Doctor Manette, of being so intimate here,î so heat length began, ìfor some year and a half, that I hope the topic on which I amabout to touch may notóî            

He was stayed by the Doctorís putting out his hand to stop him. When he hadkept it so a little while, he said, drawing it back:            

ìIs Lucie the topic?î            

ìShe is.î            

ìIt is hard for me to speak of her at any time. It is very hard for me to hearher spoken of in that tone of yours, Charles Darnay.î            

ìIt is a tone of fervent admiration, true homage, and deep love, DoctorManette!î he said deferentially.            

There was another blank silence before her father rejoined:            

ìI believe it. I do you justice; I believe it.î            

His constraint was so manifest, and it was so manifest, too, that itoriginated in an unwillingness to approach the subject, that Charles Darnayhesitated.            

ìShall I go on, sir?î            

Another blank.            

ìYes, go on.î            

ìYou anticipate what I would say, though you cannot know how earnestly I sayit, how earnestly I feel it, without knowing my secret heart, and the hopes andfears and anxieties with which it has long been laden. Dear Doctor Manette, Ilove your daughter fondly, dearly, disinterestedly, devotedly. If ever therewere love in the world, I love her. You have loved yourself; let your old lovespeak for me!î            

The Doctor sat with his face turned away, and his eyes bent on the ground. Atthe last words, he stretched out his hand again, hurriedly, and cried:            

ìNot that, sir! Let that be! I adjure you, do not recall that!î            

His cry was so like a cry of actual pain, that it rang in Charles Darnayísears long after he had ceased. He motioned with the hand he had extended, and itseemed to be an appeal to Darnay to pause. The latter so received it, andremained silent.            

ìI ask your pardon,î said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, after some moments.ìI do not doubt your loving Lucie; you may be satisfied of it.î            

He turned towards him in his chair, but did not look at him, or raise hiseyes. His chin dropped upon his hand, and his white hair overshadowed hisface:            

ìHave you spoken to Lucie?î            

ìNo.î            

ìNor written?î            

ìNever.î            

ìIt would be ungenerous to affect not to know that your self-denial is to bereferred to your consideration for her father. Her father thanks you.î            

He offered his hand; but his eyes did not go with it.            

ìI know,î said Darnay, respectfully, ìhow can I fail to know, Doctor Manette,I who have seen you together from day to day, that between you and Miss Manettethere is an affection so unusual, so touching, so belonging to the circumstancesin which it has been nurtured, that it can have few parallels, even in thetenderness between a father and child. I know, Doctor Manetteóhow can I fail toknowóthat, mingled with the affection and duty of a daughter who has become awoman, there is, in her heart, towards you, all the love and reliance of infancyitself. I know that, as in her childhood she had no parent, so she is nowdevoted to you with all the constancy and fervour of her present years andcharacter, united to the trustfulness and attachment of the early days in whichyou were lost to her. I know perfectly well that if you had been restored to herfrom the world beyond this life, you could hardly be invested, in her sight,with a more sacred character than that in which you are always with her. I knowthat when she is clinging to you, the hands of baby, girl, and woman, all inone, are round your neck. I know that in loving you she sees and loves hermother at her own age, sees and loves you at my age, loves her motherbroken-hearted, loves you through your dreadful trial and in your blessedrestoration. I have known this, night and day, since I have known you in yourhome.î            

Her father sat silent, with his face bent down. His breathing was a littlequickened; but he repressed all other signs of agitation.            

ìDear Doctor Manette, always knowing this, always seeing her and you with thishallowed light about you, I have forborne, and forborne, as long as it was inthe nature of man to do it. I have felt, and do even now feel, that to bring myloveóeven mineóbetween you, is to touch your history with something not quite sogood as itself. But I love her. Heaven is my witness that I love her!î            

ìI believe it,î answered her father, mournfully. ìI have thought so beforenow. I believe it.î            

ìBut, do not believe,î said Darnay, upon whose ear the mournful voice struckwith a reproachful sound, ìthat if my fortune were so cast as that, being oneday so happy as to make her my wife, I must at any time put any separationbetween her and you, I could or would breathe a word of what I now say. Besidesthat I should know it to be hopeless, I should know it to be a baseness. If Ihad any such possibility, even at a remote distance of years, harboured in mythoughts, and hidden in my heartóif it ever had been thereóif it ever could bethereóI could not now touch this honoured hand.î            

He laid his own upon it as he spoke.            

ìNo, dear Doctor Manette. Like you, a voluntary exile from France; like you,driven from it by its distractions, oppressions, and miseries; like you,striving to live away from it by my own exertions, and trusting in a happierfuture; I look only to sharing your fortunes, sharing your life and home, andbeing faithful to you to the death. Not to divide with Lucie her privilege asyour child, companion, and friend; but to come in aid of it, and bind her closerto you, if such a thing can be.î            

His touch still lingered on her fatherís hand. Answering the touch for amoment, but not coldly, her father rested his hands upon the arms of his chair,and looked up for the first time since the beginning of the conference. Astruggle was evidently in his face; a struggle with that occasional look whichhad a tendency in it to dark doubt and dread.            

ìYou speak so feelingly and so manfully, Charles Darnay, that I thank you withall my heart, and will open all my heartóor nearly so. Have you any reason tobelieve that Lucie loves you?î            

ìNone. As yet, none.î            

ìIs it the immediate object of this confidence, that you may at once ascertainthat, with my knowledge?î            

ìNot even so. I might not have the hopefulness to do it for weeks; I might(mistaken or not mistaken) have that hopefulness to-morrow.î            

ìDo you seek any guidance from me?î            

ìI ask none, sir. But I have thought it possible that you might have it inyour power, if you should deem it right, to give me some.î            

ìDo you seek any promise from me?î            

ìI do seek that.î            

ìWhat is it?î            

ìI well understand that, without you, I could have no hope. I well understandthat, even if Miss Manette held me at this moment in her innocent heartódo notthink I have the presumption to assume so muchóI could retain no place in itagainst her love for her father.î            

ìIf that be so, do you see what, on the other hand, is involved in it?î            

ìI understand equally well, that a word from her father in any suitorísfavour, would outweigh herself and all the world. For which reason, DoctorManette,î said Darnay, modestly but firmly, ìI would not ask that word, to savemy life.î            

ìI am sure of it. Charles Darnay, mysteries arise out of close love, as wellas out of wide division; in the former case, they are subtle and delicate, anddifficult to penetrate. My daughter Lucie is, in this one respect, such amystery to me; I can make no guess at the state of her heart.î            

ìMay I ask, sir, if you think she isóî As he hesitated, her father suppliedthe rest.            

ìIs sought by any other suitor?î            

ìIt is what I meant to say.î            

Her father considered a little before he answered:            

ìYou have seen Mr. Carton here, yourself. Mr. Stryver is here too,occasionally. If it be at all, it can only be by one of these.î            

ìOr both,î said Darnay.            

ìI had not thought of both; I should not think either, likely. You want apromise from me. Tell me what it is.î            

ìIt is, that if Miss Manette should bring to you at any time, on her own part,such a confidence as I have ventured to lay before you, you will bear testimonyto what I have said, and to your belief in it. I hope you may be able to thinkso well of me, as to urge no influence against me. I say nothing more of mystake in this; this is what I ask. The condition on which I ask it, and whichyou have an undoubted right to require, I will observe immediately.î            

ìI give the promise,î said the Doctor, ìwithout any condition. I believe yourobject to be, purely and truthfully, as you have stated it. I believe yourintention is to perpetuate, and not to weaken, the ties between me and my otherand far dearer self. If she should ever tell me that you are essential to herperfect happiness, I will give her to you. If there wereóCharles Darnay, ifthere wereóî            

The young man had taken his hand gratefully; their hands were joined as theDoctor spoke:            

ìóany fancies, any reasons, any apprehensions, anything whatsoever, new orold, against the man she really lovedóthe direct responsibility thereof notlying on his headóthey should all be obliterated for her sake. She is everythingto me; more to me than suffering, more to me than wrong, more to meóWell! Thisis idle talk.î            

So strange was the way in which he faded into silence, and so strange hisfixed look when he had ceased to speak, that Darnay felt his own hand turn coldin the hand that slowly released and dropped it.            

ìYou said something to me,î said Doctor Manette, breaking into a smile. ìWhatwas it you said to me?î            

He was at a loss how to answer, until he remembered having spoken of acondition. Relieved as his mind reverted to that, he answered:            

ìYour confidence in me ought to be returned with full confidence on my part.My present name, though but slightly changed from my motherís, is not, as youwill remember, my own. I wish to tell you what that is, and why I am inEngland.î            

ìStop!î said the Doctor of Beauvais.            

ìI wish it, that I may the better deserve your confidence, and have no secretfrom you.î            

ìStop!î            

For an instant, the Doctor even had his two hands at his ears; for anotherinstant, even had his two hands laid on Darnayís lips.            

ìTell me when I ask you, not now. If your suit should prosper, if Lucie shouldlove you, you shall tell me on your marriage morning. Do you promise?î            

ìWillingly.            

ìGive me your hand. She will be home directly, and it is better she should notsee us together to-night. Go! God bless you!î            

It was dark when Charles Darnay left him, and it was an hour later and darkerwhen Lucie came home; she hurried into the room aloneófor Miss Pross had gonestraight up-stairsóand was surprised to find his reading-chair empty.            

ìMy father!î she called to him. ìFather dear!î            

Nothing was said in answer, but she heard a low hammering sound in hisbedroom. Passing lightly across the intermediate room, she looked in at his doorand came running back frightened, crying to herself, with her blood all chilled,ìWhat shall I do! What shall I do!î            

Her uncertainty lasted but a moment; she hurried back, and tapped at his door,and softly called to him. The noise ceased at the sound of her voice, and hepresently came out to her, and they walked up and down together for a longtime.            

She came down from her bed, to look at him in his sleep that night. He sleptheavily, and his tray of shoemaking tools, and his old unfinished work, were allas usual.            

ìSydney,î said Mr. Stryver, on that self-same night, or morning, to hisjackal; ìmix another bowl of punch; I have something to say to you.î            

Sydney had been working double tides that night, and the night before, and thenight before that, and a good many nights in succession, making a grandclearance among Mr. Stryverís papers before the setting in of the long vacation.The clearance was effected at last; the Stryver arrears were handsomely fetchedup; everything was got rid of until November should come with its fogsatmospheric, and fogs legal, and bring grist to the mill again.            

Sydney was none the livelier and none the soberer for so much application. Ithad taken a deal of extra wet-towelling to pull him through the night; acorrespondingly extra quantity of wine had preceded the towelling; and he was ina very damaged condition, as he now pulled his turban off and threw it into thebasin in which he had steeped it at intervals for the last six hours.            

ìAre you mixing that other bowl of punch?î said Stryver the portly, with hishands in his waistband, glancing round from the sofa where he lay on hisback.            

ìI am.î            

ìNow, look here! I am going to tell you something that will rather surpriseyou, and that perhaps will make you think me not quite as shrewd as you usuallydo think me. I intend to marry.î            

ìDO you?î            

ìYes. And not for money. What do you say now?î            

ìI donít feel disposed to say much. Who is she?î            

ìGuess.î            

ìDo I know her?î            

ìGuess.î            

ìI am not going to guess, at five oíclock in the morning, with my brainsfrying and sputtering in my head. If you want me to guess, you must ask me todinner.î            

ìWell then, Iíll tell you,î said Stryver, coming slowly into a sittingposture. ìSydney, I rather despair of making myself intelligible to you, becauseyou are such an insensible dog.î            

ìAnd you,î returned Sydney, busy concocting the punch, ìare such a sensitiveand poetical spiritóî            

ìCome!î rejoined Stryver, laughing boastfully, ìthough I donít prefer anyclaim to being the soul of Romance (for I hope I know better), still I am atenderer sort of fellow than YOU.î            

ìYou are a luckier, if you mean that.î            

ìI donít mean that. I mean I am a man of moreómoreóî            

ìSay gallantry, while you are about it,î suggested Carton.            

ìWell! Iíll say gallantry. My meaning is that I am a man,î said Stryver,inflating himself at his friend as he made the punch, ìwho cares more to beagreeable, who takes more pains to be agreeable, who knows better how to beagreeable, in a womanís society, than you do.î            

ìGo on,î said Sydney Carton.            

ìNo; but before I go on,î said Stryver, shaking his head in his bullying way,ìIíll have this out with you. Youíve been at Doctor Manetteís house as much as Ihave, or more than I have. Why, I have been ashamed of your moroseness there!Your manners have been of that silent and sullen and hangdog kind, that, upon mylife and soul, I have been ashamed of you, Sydney!î            

ìIt should be very beneficial to a man in your practice at the bar, to beashamed of anything,î returned Sydney; ìyou ought to be much obliged tome.î            

ìYou shall not get off in that way,î rejoined Stryver, shouldering therejoinder at him; ìno, Sydney, itís my duty to tell youóand I tell you to yourface to do you goodóthat you are a devilish ill-conditioned fellow in that sortof society. You are a disagreeable fellow.î            

Sydney drank a bumper of the punch he had made, and laughed.            

ìLook at me!î said Stryver, squaring himself; ìI have less need to make myselfagreeable than you have, being more independent in circumstances. Why do I doit?î            

ìI never saw you do it yet,î muttered Carton.            

ìI do it because itís politic; I do it on principle. And look at me! I geton.î            

ìYou donít get on with your account of your matrimonial intentions,î answeredCarton, with a careless air; ìI wish you would keep to that. As to meówill younever understand that I am incorrigible?î            

He asked the question with some appearance of scorn.            

ìYou have no business to be incorrigible,î was his friendís answer, deliveredin no very soothing tone.            

ìI have no business to be, at all, that I know of,î said Sydney Carton. ìWhois the lady?î            

ìNow, donít let my announcement of the name make you uncomfortable, Sydney,îsaid Mr. Stryver, preparing him with ostentatious friendliness for thedisclosure he was about to make, ìbecause I know you donít mean half you say;and if you meant it all, it would be of no importance. I make this littlepreface, because you once mentioned the young lady to me in slightingterms.î            

ìI did?î            

ìCertainly; and in these chambers.î            

Sydney Carton looked at his punch and looked at his complacent friend; drankhis punch and looked at his complacent friend.            

ìYou made mention of the young lady as a golden-haired doll. The young lady isMiss Manette. If you had been a fellow of any sensitiveness or delicacy offeeling in that kind of way, Sydney, I might have been a little resentful ofyour employing such a designation; but you are not. You want that sensealtogether; therefore I am no more annoyed when I think of the expression, thanI should be annoyed by a manís opinion of a picture of mine, who had no eye forpictures: or of a piece of music of mine, who had no ear for music.î            

Sydney Carton drank the punch at a great rate; drank it by bumpers, looking athis friend.            

ìNow you know all about it, Syd,î said Mr. Stryver. ìI donít care aboutfortune: she is a charming creature, and I have made up my mind to pleasemyself: on the whole, I think I can afford to please myself. She will have in mea man already pretty well off, and a rapidly rising man, and a man of somedistinction: it is a piece of good fortune for her, but she is worthy of goodfortune. Are you astonished?î            

Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, ìWhy should I beastonished?î            

ìYou approve?î            

Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, ìWhy should I not approve?î            

ìWell!î said his friend Stryver, ìyou take it more easily than I fancied youwould, and are less mercenary on my behalf than I thought you would be; though,to be sure, you know well enough by this time that your ancient chum is a man ofa pretty strong will. Yes, Sydney, I have had enough of this style of life, withno other as a change from it; I feel that it is a pleasant thing for a man tohave a home when he feels inclined to go to it (when he doesnít, he can stayaway), and I feel that Miss Manette will tell well in any station, and willalways do me credit. So I have made up my mind. And now, Sydney, old boy, I wantto say a word to YOU about YOUR prospects. You are in a bad way, you know; youreally are in a bad way. You donít know the value of money, you live hard,youíll knock up one of these days, and be ill and poor; you really ought tothink about a nurse.î            

The prosperous patronage with which he said it, made him look twice as big ashe was, and four times as offensive.            

ìNow, let me recommend you,î pursued Stryver, ìto look it in the face. I havelooked it in the face, in my different way; look it in the face, you, in yourdifferent way. Marry. Provide somebody to take care of you. Never mind yourhaving no enjoyment of womenís society, nor understanding of it, nor tact forit. Find out somebody. Find out some respectable woman with a littlepropertyósomebody in the landlady way, or lodging-letting wayóand marry her,against a rainy day. Thatís the kind of thing for YOU. Now think of it,Sydney.î            

ìIíll think of it,î said Sydney.            

Mr. Stryver having made up his mind to that magnanimous bestowal of goodfortune on the Doctorís daughter, resolved to make her happiness known to herbefore he left town for the Long Vacation. After some mental debating of thepoint, he came to the conclusion that it would be as well to get all thepreliminaries done with, and they could then arrange at their leisure whether heshould give her his hand a week or two before Michaelmas Term, or in the littleChristmas vacation between it and Hilary.            

As to the strength of his case, he had not a doubt about it, but clearly sawhis way to the verdict. Argued with the jury on substantial worldly groundsótheonly grounds ever worth taking into accountóit was a plain case, and had not aweak spot in it. He called himself for the plaintiff, there was no getting overhis evidence, the counsel for the defendant threw up his brief, and the jury didnot even turn to consider. After trying it, Stryver, C. J., was satisfied thatno plainer case could be.            

Accordingly, Mr. Stryver inaugurated the Long Vacation with a formal proposalto take Miss Manette to Vauxhall Gardens; that failing, to Ranelagh; thatunaccountably failing too, it behoved him to present himself in Soho, and theredeclare his noble mind.            

Towards Soho, therefore, Mr. Stryver shouldered his way from the Temple, whilethe bloom of the Long Vacationís infancy was still upon it. Anybody who had seenhim projecting himself into Soho while he was yet on Saint Dunstanís side ofTemple Bar, bursting in his full-blown way along the pavement, to the jostlementof all weaker people, might have seen how safe and strong he was.            

His way taking him past Tellsonís, and he both banking at Tellsonís andknowing Mr. Lorry as the intimate friend of the Manettes, it entered Mr.Stryverís mind to enter the bank, and reveal to Mr. Lorry the brightness of theSoho horizon. So, he pushed open the door with the weak rattle in its throat,stumbled down the two steps, got past the two ancient cashiers, and shoulderedhimself into the musty back closet where Mr. Lorry sat at great books ruled forfigures, with perpendicular iron bars to his window as if that were ruled forfigures too, and everything under the clouds were a sum.            

ìHalloa!î said Mr. Stryver. ìHow do you do? I hope you are well!î            

It was Stryverís grand peculiarity that he always seemed too big for anyplace, or space. He was so much too big for Tellsonís, that old clerks indistant corners looked up with looks of remonstrance, as though he squeezed themagainst the wall. The House itself, magnificently reading the paper quite in thefar-off perspective, lowered displeased, as if the Stryver head had been buttedinto its responsible waistcoat.             

The discreet Mr. Lorry said, in a sample tone of the voice he would recommendunder the circumstances, ìHow do you do, Mr. Stryver? How do you do, sir?î andshook hands. There was a peculiarity in his manner of shaking hands, always tobe seen in any clerk at Tellsonís who shook hands with a customer when the Housepervaded the air. He shook in a self-abnegating way, as one who shook forTellson and Co.            

ìCan I do anything for you, Mr. Stryver?î asked Mr. Lorry, in his businesscharacter.            

ìWhy, no, thank you; this is a private visit to yourself, Mr. Lorry; I havecome for a private word.î            

ìOh indeed!î said Mr. Lorry, bending down his ear, while his eye strayed tothe House afar off.            

ìI am going,î said Mr. Stryver, leaning his arms confidentially on the desk:whereupon, although it was a large double one, there appeared to be not halfdesk enough for him: ìI am going to make an offer of myself in marriage to youragreeable little friend, Miss Manette, Mr. Lorry.î            

ìOh dear me!î cried Mr. Lorry, rubbing his chin, and looking at his visitordubiously.            

ìOh dear me, sir?î repeated Stryver, drawing back. ìOh dear you, sir? What mayyour meaning be, Mr. Lorry?î            

ìMy meaning,î answered the man of business, ìis, of course, friendly andappreciative, and that it does you the greatest credit, andóin short, my meaningis everything you could desire. Butóreally, you know, Mr. Stryveróî Mr. Lorrypaused, and shook his head at him in the oddest manner, as if he were compelledagainst his will to add, internally, ìyou know there really is so much too muchof you!î            

ìWell!î said Stryver, slapping the desk with his contentious hand, opening hiseyes wider, and taking a long breath, ìif I understand you, Mr. Lorry, Iíll behanged!î            

Mr. Lorry adjusted his little wig at both ears as a means towards that end,and bit the feather of a pen.            

ìDón it all, sir!î said Stryver, staring at him, ìam I not eligible?î            

ìOh dear yes! Yes. Oh yes, youíre eligible!î said Mr. Lorry. ìIf you sayeligible, you are eligible.î            

ìAm I not prosperous?î asked Stryver.            

ìOh! if you come to prosperous, you are prosperous,î said Mr. Lorry.            

ìAnd advancing?î            

ìIf you come to advancing you know,î said Mr. Lorry, delighted to be able tomake another admission, ìnobody can doubt that.î            

ìThen what on earth is your meaning, Mr. Lorry?î demanded Stryver, perceptiblycrestfallen.            

ìWell! IóWere you going there now?î asked Mr. Lorry.            

ìStraight!î said Stryver, with a plump of his fist on the desk.            

ìThen I think I wouldnít, if I was you.î            

ìWhy?î said Stryver. ìNow, Iíll put you in a corner,î forensically shaking aforefinger at him. ìYou are a man of business and bound to have a reason. Stateyour reason. Why wouldnít you go?î            

ìBecause,î said Mr. Lorry, ìI wouldnít go on such an object without havingsome cause to believe that I should succeed.î            

ìDón ME!î cried Stryver, ìbut this beats everything.î            

Mr. Lorry glanced at the distant House, and glanced at the angryStryver.            

ìHereís a man of businessóa man of yearsóa man of experienceóIN a Bank,î saidStryver; ìand having summed up three leading reasons for complete success, hesays thereís no reason at all! Says it with his head on!î Mr. Stryver remarkedupon the peculiarity as if it would have been infinitely less remarkable if hehad said it with his head off.            

ìWhen I speak of success, I speak of success with the young lady; and when Ispeak of causes and reasons to make success probable, I speak of causes andreasons that will tell as such with the young lady. The young lady, my goodsir,î said Mr. Lorry, mildly tapping the Stryver arm, ìthe young lady. The younglady goes before all.î            

ìThen you mean to tell me, Mr. Lorry,î said Stryver, squaring his elbows,ìthat it is your deliberate opinion that the young lady at present in questionis a mincing Fool?î            

ìNot exactly so. I mean to tell you, Mr. Stryver,î said Mr. Lorry, reddening,ìthat I will hear no disrespectful word of that young lady from any lips; andthat if I knew any manówhich I hope I do notówhose taste was so coarse, andwhose temper was so overbearing, that he could not restrain himself fromspeaking disrespectfully of that young lady at this desk, not even Tellsonísshould prevent my giving him a piece of my mind.î            

The necessity of being angry in a suppressed tone had put Mr. Stryverísblood-vessels into a dangerous state when it was his turn to be angry; Mr.Lorryís veins, methodical as their courses could usually be, were in no betterstate now it was his turn.            

ìThat is what I mean to tell you, sir,î said Mr. Lorry. ìPray let there be nomistake about it.î            

Mr. Stryver sucked the end of a ruler for a little while, and then stoodhitting a tune out of his teeth with it, which probably gave him the toothache.He broke the awkward silence by saying:             

ìThis is something new to me, Mr. Lorry. You deliberately advise me not to goup to Soho and offer myselfóMYself, Stryver of the Kingís Bench bar?î            

ìDo you ask me for my advice, Mr. Stryver?î            

ìYes, I do.î            

ìVery good. Then I give it, and you have repeated it correctly.î            

ìAnd all I can say of it is,î laughed Stryver with a vexed laugh, ìthatthisóha, ha!óbeats everything past, present, and to come.î            

ìNow understand me,î pursued Mr. Lorry. ìAs a man of business, I am notjustified in saying anything about this matter, for, as a man of business, Iknow nothing of it. But, as an old fellow, who has carried Miss Manette in hisarms, who is the trusted friend of Miss Manette and of her father too, and whohas a great affection for them both, I have spoken. The confidence is not of myseeking, recollect. Now, you think I may not be right?î            

ìNot I!î said Stryver, whistling. ìI canít undertake to find third parties incommon sense; I can only find it for myself. I suppose sense in certainquarters; you suppose mincing bread-and-butter nonsense. Itís new to me, but youare right, I dare say.î            

ìWhat I suppose, Mr. Stryver, I claim to characterise for myselfóAndunderstand me, sir,î said Mr. Lorry, quickly flushing again, ìI will notónoteven at Tellsonísóhave it characterised for me by any gentlemanbreathing.î            

ìThere! I beg your pardon!î said Stryver.            

ìGranted. Thank you. Well, Mr. Stryver, I was about to say: óit might bepainful to you to find yourself mistaken, it might be painful to Doctor Manetteto have the task of being explicit with you, it might be very painful to MissManette to have the task of being explicit with you. You know the terms uponwhich I have the honour and happiness to stand with the family. If you please,committing you in no way, representing you in no way, I will undertake tocorrect my advice by the exercise of a little new observation and judgmentexpressly brought to bear upon it. If you should then be dissatisfied with it,you can but test its soundness for yourself; if, on the other hand, you shouldbe satisfied with it, and it should be what it now is, it may spare all sideswhat is best spared. What do you say?î            

ìHow long would you keep me in town?î            

ìOh! It is only a question of a few hours. I could go to Soho in the evening,and come to your chambers afterwards.î            

ìThen I say yes,î said Stryver: ìI wonít go up there now, I am not so hot uponit as that comes to; I say yes, and I shall expect you to look in to-night. Goodmorning.î            

Then Mr. Stryver turned and burst out of the Bank, causing such a concussionof air on his passage through, that to stand up against it bowing behind the twocounters, required the utmost remaining strength of the two ancient clerks.Those venerable and feeble persons were always seen by the public in the act ofbowing, and were popularly believed, when they had bowed a customer out, stillto keep on bowing in the empty office until they bowed another customerin.            

The barrister was keen enough to divine that the banker would not have gone sofar in his expression of opinion on any less solid ground than moral certainty.Unprepared as he was for the large pill he had to swallow, he got it down. ìAndnow,î said Mr. Stryver, shaking his forensic forefinger at the Temple ingeneral, when it was down, ìmy way out of this, is, to put you all in thewrong.î            

It was a bit of the art of an Old Bailey tactician, in which he found greatrelief. ìYou shall not put me in the wrong, young lady,î said Mr. Stryver; ìIílldo that for you.î            

Accordingly, when Mr. Lorry called that night as late as ten oíclock, Mr.Stryver, among a quantity of books and papers littered out for the purpose,seemed to have nothing less on his mind than the subject of the morning. He evenshowed surprise when he saw Mr. Lorry, and was altogether in an absent andpreoccupied state.            

ìWell!î said that good-natured emissary, after a full half-hour of bootlessattempts to bring him round to the question. ìI have been to Soho.î            

ìTo Soho?î repeated Mr. Stryver, coldly. ìOh, to be sure! What am I thinkingof!î            

ìAnd I have no doubt,î said Mr. Lorry, ìthat I was right in the conversationwe had. My opinion is confirmed, and I reiterate my advice.î            

ìI assure you,î returned Mr. Stryver, in the friendliest way, ìthat I am sorryfor it on your account, and sorry for it on the poor fatherís account. I knowthis must always be a sore subject with the family; let us say no more aboutit.î            

ìI donít understand you,î said Mr. Lorry.            

ìI dare say not,î rejoined Stryver, nodding his head in a smoothing and finalway; ìno matter, no matter.î            

ìBut it does matter,î Mr. Lorry urged.            

ìNo it doesnít; I assure you it doesnít. Having supposed that there was sensewhere there is no sense, and a laudable ambition where there is not a laudableambition, I am well out of my mistake, and no harm is done. Young women havecommitted similar follies often before, and have repented them in poverty andobscurity often before. In an unselfish aspect, I am sorry that the thing isdropped, because it would have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point ofview; in a selfish aspect, I am glad that the thing has dropped, because itwould have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point of viewóit is hardlynecessary to say I could have gained nothing by it. There is no harm at alldone. I have not proposed to the young lady, and, between ourselves, I am by nomeans certain, on reflection, that I ever should have committed myself to thatextent. Mr. Lorry, you cannot control the mincing vanities and giddinesses ofempty-headed girls; you must not expect to do it, or you will always bedisappointed. Now, pray say no more about it. I tell you, I regret it on accountof others, but I am satisfied on my own account. And I am really very muchobliged to you for allowing me to sound you, and for giving me your advice; youknow the young lady better than I do; you were right, it never would havedone.î            

Mr. Lorry was so taken aback, that he looked quite stupidly at Mr. Stryvershouldering him towards the door, with an appearance of showering generosity,forbearance, and goodwill, on his erring head. ìMake the best of it, my dearsir,î said Stryver; ìsay no more about it; thank you again for allowing me tosound you; good night!î            

Mr. Lorry was out in the night, before he knew where he was. Mr. Stryver waslying back on his sofa, winking at his ceiling.            

If Sydney Carton ever shone anywhere, he certainly never shone in the house ofDoctor Manette. He had been there often, during a whole year, and had alwaysbeen the same moody and morose lounger there. When he cared to talk, he talkedwell; but, the cloud of caring for nothing, which overshadowed him with such afatal darkness, was very rarely pierced by the light within him.            

And yet he did care something for the streets that environed that house, andfor the senseless stones that made their pavements. Many a night he vaguely andunhappily wandered there, when wine had brought no transitory gladness to him;many a dreary daybreak revealed his solitary figure lingering there, and stilllingering there when the first beams of the sun brought into strong relief,removed beauties of architecture in spires of churches and lofty buildings, asperhaps the quiet time brought some sense of better things, else forgotten andunattainable, into his mind. Of late, the neglected bed in the Temple Court hadknown him more scantily than ever; and often when he had thrown himself upon itno longer than a few minutes, he had got up again, and haunted thatneighbourhood.            

On a day in August, when Mr. Stryver (after notifying to his jackal that ìhehad thought better of that marrying matterî) had carried his delicacy intoDevonshire, and when the sight and scent of flowers in the City streets had somewaifs of goodness in them for the worst, of health for the sickliest, and ofyouth for the oldest, Sydneyís feet still trod those stones. From beingirresolute and purposeless, his feet became animated by an intention, and, inthe working out of that intention, they took him to the Doctorís door.            

He was shown up-stairs, and found Lucie at her work, alone. She had never beenquite at her ease with him, and received him with some little embarrassment ashe seated himself near her table. But, looking up at his face in the interchangeof the first few common-places, she observed a change in it.            

ìI fear you are not well, Mr. Carton!î            

ìNo. But the life I lead, Miss Manette, is not conducive to health. What is tobe expected of, or by, such profligates?î            

ìIs it notóforgive me; I have begun the question on my lipsóa pity to live nobetter life?î            

ìGod knows it is a shame!î            

ìThen why not change it?î            

Looking gently at him again, she was surprised and saddened to see that therewere tears in his eyes. There were tears in his voice too, as heanswered:            

ìIt is too late for that. I shall never be better than I am. I shall sinklower, and be worse.î            

He leaned an elbow on her table, and covered his eyes with his hand. The tabletrembled in the silence that followed.            

She had never seen him softened, and was much distressed. He knew her to beso, without looking at her, and said:            

ìPray forgive me, Miss Manette. I break down before the knowledge of what Iwant to say to you. Will you hear me?î            

ìIf it will do you any good, Mr. Carton, if it would make you happier, itwould make me very glad!î            

ìGod bless you for your sweet compassion!î            

He unshaded his face after a little while, and spoke steadily.            

ìDonít be afraid to hear me. Donít shrink from anything I say. I am like onewho died young. All my life might have been.î            

ìNo, Mr. Carton. I am sure that the best part of it might still be; I am surethat you might be much, much worthier of yourself.î            

ìSay of you, Miss Manette, and although I know betteróalthough in the mysteryof my own wretched heart I know betteróI shall never forget it!î            

She was pale and trembling. He came to her relief with a fixed despair ofhimself which made the interview unlike any other that could have beenholden.            

ìIf it had been possible, Miss Manette, that you could have returned the loveof the man you see before yourselfóflung away, wasted, drunken, poor creature ofmisuse as you know him to beóhe would have been conscious this day and hour, inspite of his happiness, that he would bring you to misery, bring you to sorrowand repentance, blight you, disgrace you, pull you down with him. I know verywell that you can have no tenderness for me; I ask for none; I am even thankfulthat it cannot be.î            

ìWithout it, can I not save you, Mr. Carton? Can I not recall youóforgive meagain! óto a better course? Can I in no way repay your confidence? I know thisis a confidence,î she modestly said, after a little hesitation, and in earnesttears, ìI know you would say this to no one else. Can I turn it to no goodaccount for yourself, Mr. Carton?î            

He shook his head.            

ìTo none. No, Miss Manette, to none. If you will hear me through a very littlemore, all you can ever do for me is done. I wish you to know that you have beenthe last dream of my soul. In my degradation I have not been so degraded butthat the sight of you with your father, and of this home made such a home byyou, has stirred old shadows that I thought had died out of me. Since I knewyou, I have been troubled by a remorse that I thought would never reproach meagain, and have heard whispers from old voices impelling me upward, that Ithought were silent for ever. I have had unformed ideas of striving afresh,beginning anew, shaking off sloth and sensuality, and fighting out the abandonedfight. A dream, all a dream, that ends in nothing, and leaves the sleeper wherehe lay down, but I wish you to know that you inspired it.î            

ìWill nothing of it remain? O Mr. Carton, think again! Try again!î            

ìNo, Miss Manette; all through it, I have known myself to be quiteundeserving. And yet I have had the weakness, and have still the weakness, towish you to know with what a sudden mastery you kindled me, heap of ashes that Iam, into fireóa fire, however, inseparable in its nature from myself, quickeningnothing, lighting nothing, doing no service, idly burning away.î            

ìSince it is my misfortune, Mr. Carton, to have made you more unhappy than youwere before you knew meóî            

ìDonít say that, Miss Manette, for you would have reclaimed me, if anythingcould. You will not be the cause of my becoming worse.î            

ìSince the state of your mind that you describe, is, at all events,attributable to some influence of mineóthis is what I mean, if I can make itplainócan I use no influence to serve you? Have I no power for good, with you,at all?î            

ìThe utmost good that I am capable of now, Miss Manette, I have come here torealise. Let me carry through the rest of my misdirected life, the remembrancethat I opened my heart to you, last of all the world; and that there wassomething left in me at this time which you could deplore and pity.î            

ìWhich I entreated you to believe, again and again, most fervently, with allmy heart, was capable of better things, Mr. Carton!î            

ìEntreat me to believe it no more, Miss Manette. I have proved myself, and Iknow better. I distress you; I draw fast to an end. Will you let me believe,when I recall this day, that the last confidence of my life was reposed in yourpure and innocent breast, and that it lies there alone, and will be shared by noone?î            

ìIf that will be a consolation to you, yes.î            

ìNot even by the dearest one ever to be known to you?î            

ìMr. Carton,î she answered, after an agitated pause, ìthe secret is yours, notmine; and I promise to respect it.î            

ìThank you. And again, God bless you.î            

He put her hand to his lips, and moved towards the door.            

ìBe under no apprehension, Miss Manette, of my ever resuming this conversationby so much as a passing word. I will never refer to it again. If I were dead,that could not be surer than it is henceforth. In the hour of my death, I shallhold sacred the one good remembranceóand shall thank and bless you for itóthatmy last avowal of myself was made to you, and that my name, and faults, andmiseries were gently carried in your heart. May it otherwise be light andhappy!î            

He was so unlike what he had ever shown himself to be, and it was so sad tothink how much he had thrown away, and how much he every day kept down andperverted, that Lucie Manette wept mournfully for him as he stood looking backat her.            

ìBe comforted!î he said, ìI am not worth such feeling, Miss Manette. An houror two hence, and the low companions and low habits that I scorn but yield to,will render me less worth such tears as those, than any wretch who creeps alongthe streets. Be comforted! But, within myself, I shall always be, towards you,what I am now, though outwardly I shall be what you have heretofore seen me. Thelast supplication but one I make to you, is, that you will believe this ofme.î            

ìI will, Mr. Carton.î            

ìMy last supplication of all, is this; and with it, I will relieve you of avisitor with whom I well know you have nothing in unison, and between whom andyou there is an impassable space. It is useless to say it, I know, but it risesout of my soul. For you, and for any dear to you, I would do anything. If mycareer were of that better kind that there was any opportunity or capacity ofsacrifice in it, I would embrace any sacrifice for you and for those dear toyou. Try to hold me in your mind, at some quiet times, as ardent and sincere inthis one thing. The time will come, the time will not be long in coming, whennew ties will be formed about youóties that will bind you yet more tenderly andstrongly to the home you so adornóthe dearest ties that will ever grace andgladden you. O Miss Manette, when the little picture of a happy fatherís facelooks up in yours, when you see your own bright beauty springing up anew at yourfeet, think now and then that there is a man who would give his life, to keep alife you love beside you!î            

He said, ìFarewell!î said a last ìGod bless you!î and left her.            

To the eyes of Mr. Jeremiah Cruncher, sitting on his stool in Fleet-streetwith his grisly urchin beside him, a vast number and variety of objects inmovement were every day presented. Who could sit upon anything in Fleet-streetduring the busy hours of the day, and not be dazed and deafened by two immenseprocessions, one ever tending westward with the sun, the other ever tendingeastward from the sun, both ever tending to the plains beyond the range of redand purple where the sun goes down!            

With his straw in his mouth, Mr. Cruncher sat watching the two streams, likethe heathen rustic who has for several centuries been on duty watching onestreamósaving that Jerry had no expectation of their ever running dry. Nor wouldit have been an expectation of a hopeful kind, since a small part of his incomewas derived from the pilotage of timid women (mostly of a full habit and pastthe middle term of life) from Tellsonís side of the tides to the opposite shore.Brief as such companionship was in every separate instance, Mr. Cruncher neverfailed to become so interested in the lady as to express a strong desire to havethe honour of drinking her very good health. And it was from the gifts bestowedupon him towards the execution of this benevolent purpose, that he recruited hisfinances, as just now observed.            

Time was, when a poet sat upon a stool in a public place, and mused in thesight of men. Mr. Cruncher, sitting on a stool in a public place, but not beinga poet, mused as little as possible, and looked about him.            

It fell out that he was thus engaged in a season when crowds were few, andbelated women few, and when his affairs in general were so unprosperous as toawaken a strong suspicion in his breast that Mrs. Cruncher must have beenìfloppingî in some pointed manner, when an unusual concourse pouring downFleet-street westward, attracted his attention. Looking that way, Mr. Crunchermade out that some kind of funeral was coming along, and that there was popularobjection to this funeral, which engendered uproar.            

ìYoung Jerry,î said Mr. Cruncher, turning to his offspring, ìitís aburyiní.î            

ìHooroar, father!î cried Young Jerry.            

The young gentleman uttered this exultant sound with mysterious significance.The elder gentleman took the cry so ill, that he watched his opportunity, andsmote the young gentleman on the ear.            

ìWhat díye mean? What are you hooroaring at? What do you want to conwey toyour own father, you young Rip? This boy is a getting too many for ME!î said Mr.Cruncher, surveying him. ìHim and his hooroars! Donít let me hear no more ofyou, or you shall feel some more of me. Díye hear?î            

ìI warnít doing no harm,î Young Jerry protested, rubbing his cheek.            

ìDrop it then,î said Mr. Cruncher; ìI wonít have none of YOUR no harms. Get atop of that there seat, and look at the crowd.î            

His son obeyed, and the crowd approached; they were bawling and hissing rounda dingy hearse and dingy mourning coach, in which mourning coach there was onlyone mourner, dressed in the dingy trappings that were considered essential tothe dignity of the position. The position appeared by no means to please him,however, with an increasing rabble surrounding the coach, deriding him, makinggrimaces at him, and incessantly groaning and calling out: ìYah! Spies! Tst!Yaha! Spies!î with many compliments too numerous and forcible to repeat.            

Funerals had at all times a remarkable attraction for Mr. Cruncher; he alwayspricked up his senses, and became excited, when a funeral passed Tellsonís.Naturally, therefore, a funeral with this uncommon attendance excited himgreatly, and he asked of the first man who ran against him:            

ìWhat is it, brother? Whatís it about?î            

ìI donít know,î said the man. ìSpies! Yaha! Tst!Spies!î            

He asked another man. ìWho is it?î            

ìI donít know,î returned the man, clapping his hands to hismouth nevertheless, and vociferating in a surprising heat and with the greatestardour, ìSpies! Yaha! Tst, tst! Spióies!î            

At length, a person better informed on the merits of the case, tumbled againsthim, and from this person he learned that the funeral was the funeral of oneRoger Cly.            

ìWas He a spy?î asked Mr. Cruncher.            

ìOld Bailey spy,î returned his informant. ìYaha! Tst! Yah! Old BaileySpióióies!î            

ìWhy, to be sure!î exclaimed Jerry, recalling the Trial at which he hadassisted. ìIíve seen him. Dead, is he?î            

ìDead as mutton,î returned the other, ìand canít be too dead. Have ëem out,there! Spies! Pull ëem out, there! Spies!î            

The idea was so acceptable in the prevalent absence of any idea, that thecrowd caught it up with eagerness, and loudly repeating the suggestion to haveëem out, and to pull ëem out, mobbed the two vehicles so closely that they cameto a stop. On the crowdís opening the coach doors, the one mourner scuffled outof himself and was in their hands for a moment; but he was so alert, and madesuch good use of his time, that in another moment he was scouring away up abye-street, after shedding his cloak, hat, long hatband, whitepocket-handkerchief, and other symbolical tears.            

These, the people tore to pieces and scattered far and wide with greatenjoyment, while the tradesmen hurriedly shut up their shops; for a crowd inthose times stopped at nothing, and was a monster much dreaded. They had alreadygot the length of opening the hearse to take the coffin out, when some brightergenius proposed instead, its being escorted to its destination amidst generalrejoicing. Practical suggestions being much needed, this suggestion, too, wasreceived with acclamation, and the coach was immediately filled with eightinside and a dozen out, while as many people got on the roof of the hearse ascould by any exercise of ingenuity stick upon it. Among the first of thesevolunteers was Jerry Cruncher himself, who modestly concealed his spiky headfrom the observation of Tellsonís, in the further corner of the mourningcoach.            

The officiating undertakers made some protest against these changes in theceremonies; but, the river being alarmingly near, and several voices remarkingon the efficacy of cold immersion in bringing refractory members of theprofession to reason, the protest was faint and brief. The remodelled processionstarted, with a chimney-sweep driving the hearseóadvised by the regular driver,who was perched beside him, under close inspection, for the purposeóand with apieman, also attended by his cabinet minister, driving the mourning coach. Abear-leader, a popular street character of the time, was impressed as anadditional ornament, before the cavalcade had gone far down the Strand; and hisbear, who was black and very mangy, gave quite an Undertaking air to that partof the procession in which he walked.            

Thus, with beer-drinking, pipe-smoking, song-roaring, and infinitecaricaturing of woe, the disorderly procession went its way, recruiting at everystep, and all the shops shutting up before it. Its destination was the oldchurch of Saint Pancras, far off in the fields. It got there in course of time;insisted on pouring into the burial-ground; finally, accomplished the intermentof the deceased Roger Cly in its own way, and highly to its ownsatisfaction.            

The dead man disposed of, and the crowd being under the necessity of providingsome other entertainment for itself, another brighter genius (or perhaps thesame) conceived the humour of impeaching casual passers-by, as Old Bailey spies,and wreaking vengeance on them. Chase was given to some scores of inoffensivepersons who had never been near the Old Bailey in their lives, in therealisation of this fancy, and they were roughly hustled and maltreated. Thetransition to the sport of window-breaking, and thence to the plundering ofpublic-houses, was easy and natural. At last, after several hours, when sundrysummer-houses had been pulled down, and some area-railings had been torn up, toarm the more belligerent spirits, a rumour got about that the Guards werecoming. Before this rumour, the crowd gradually melted away, and perhaps theGuards came, and perhaps they never came, and this was the usual progress of amob.            

Mr. Cruncher did not assist at the closing sports, but had remained behind inthe churchyard, to confer and condole with the undertakers. The place had asoothing influence on him. He procured a pipe from a neighbouring public-house,and smoked it, looking in at the railings and maturely considering thespot.            

ìJerry,î said Mr. Cruncher, apostrophising himself in his usual way, ìyou seethat there Cly that day, and you see with your own eyes that he was a young ëunand a straight made ëun.î            

Having smoked his pipe out, and ruminated a little longer, he turned himselfabout, that he might appear, before the hour of closing, on his station atTellsonís. Whether his meditations on mortality had touched his liver, orwhether his general health had been previously at all amiss, or whether hedesired to show a little attention to an eminent man, is not so much to thepurpose, as that he made a short call upon his medical adviseróa distinguishedsurgeonóon his way back.            

Young Jerry relieved his father with dutiful interest, and reported No job inhis absence. The bank closed, the ancient clerks came out, the usual watch wasset, and Mr. Cruncher and his son went home to tea.            

ìNow, I tell you where it is!î said Mr. Cruncher to his wife, on entering.ìIf, as a honest tradesman, my wenturs goes wrong to-night, I shall make surethat youíve been praying again me, and I shall work you for it just the same asif I seen you do it.î            

The dejected Mrs. Cruncher shook her head.            

ìWhy, youíre at it afore my face!î said Mr. Cruncher, with signs of angryapprehension.            

ìI am saying nothing.î            

ìWell, then; donít meditate nothing. You might as well flop as meditate. Youmay as well go again me one way as another. Drop it altogether.î            

ìYes, Jerry.î            

ìYes, Jerry,î repeated Mr. Cruncher sitting down to tea. ìAh! It IS yes,Jerry. Thatís about it. You may say yes, Jerry.î            

Mr. Cruncher had no particular meaning in these sulky corroborations, but madeuse of them, as people not unfrequently do, to express general ironicaldissatisfaction.            

ìYou and your yes, Jerry,î said Mr. Cruncher, taking a bite out of hisbread-and-butter, and seeming to help it down with a large invisible oyster outof his saucer. ìAh! I think so. I believe you.î            

ìYou are going out to-night?î asked his decent wife, when he took anotherbite.            

ìYes, I am.î            

ìMay I go with you, father?î asked his son, briskly.            

ìNo, you maynít. Iím a goingóas your mother knowsóa fishing. Thatís where Iímgoing to. Going a fishing.î            

ìYour fishing-rod gets rayther rusty; donít it, father?î            

ìNever you mind.î            

ìShall you bring any fish home, father?î            

ìIf I donít, youíll have short commons, to-morrow,î returned that gentleman,shaking his head; ìthatís questions enough for you; I ainít a going out, tillyouíve been long abed.î            

He devoted himself during the remainder of the evening to keeping a mostvigilant watch on Mrs. Cruncher, and sullenly holding her in conversation thatshe might be prevented from meditating any petitions to his disadvantage. Withthis view, he urged his son to hold her in conversation also, and led theunfortunate woman a hard life by dwelling on any causes of complaint he couldbring against her, rather than he would leave her for a moment to her ownreflections. The devoutest person could have rendered no greater homage to theefficacy of an honest prayer than he did in this distrust of his wife. It was asif a professed unbeliever in ghosts should be frightened by a ghoststory.            

ìAnd mind you!î said Mr. Cruncher. ìNo games to-morrow! If I, as a honesttradesman, succeed in providing a jinte of meat or two, none of your nottouching of it, and sticking to bread. If I, as a honest tradesman, am able toprovide a little beer, none of your declaring on water. When you go to Rome, doas Rome does. Rome will be a ugly customer to you, if you donít.    Iím your Rome, you know.î            

Then he began grumbling again:            

ìWith your flying into the face of your own wittles and drink! I donít knowhow scarce you maynít make the wittles and drink here, by your flopping tricksand your unfeeling conduct. Look at your boy: he IS yourín, ainít he? Heís asthin as a lath. Do you call yourself a mother, and not know that a motherísfirst duty is to blow her boy out?î            

This touched Young Jerry on a tender place; who adjured his mother to performher first duty, and, whatever else she did or neglected, above all things to layespecial stress on the discharge of that maternal function so affectingly anddelicately indicated by his other parent.            

Thus the evening wore away with the Cruncher family, until Young Jerry wasordered to bed, and his mother, laid under similar injunctions, obeyed them. Mr.Cruncher beguiled the earlier watches of the night with solitary pipes, and didnot start upon his excursion until nearly one oíclock. Towards that small andghostly hour, he rose up from his chair, took a key out of his pocket, opened alocked cupboard, and brought forth a sack, a crowbar of convenient size, a ropeand chain, and other fishing tackle of that nature. Disposing these articlesabout him in skilful manner, he bestowed a parting defiance on Mrs. Cruncher,extinguished the light, and went out.            

Young Jerry, who had only made a feint of undressing when he went to bed, wasnot long after his father. Under cover of the darkness he followed out of theroom, followed down the stairs, followed down the court, followed out into thestreets. He was in no uneasiness concerning his getting into the house again,for it was full of lodgers, and the door stood ajar all night.            

Impelled by a laudable ambition to study the art and mystery of his fatheríshonest calling, Young Jerry, keeping as close to house fronts, walls, anddoorways, as his eyes were close to one another, held his honoured parent inview. The honoured parent steering Northward, had not gone far, when he wasjoined by another disciple of Izaak Walton, and the two trudged ontogether.            

Within half an hour from the first starting, they were beyond the winkinglamps, and the more than winking watchmen, and were out upon a lonely road.Another fisherman was picked up hereóand that so silently, that if Young Jerryhad been superstitious, he might have supposed the second follower of the gentlecraft to have, all of a sudden, split himself into two.            

The three went on, and Young Jerry went on, until the three stopped under abank overhanging the road. Upon the top of the bank was a low brick wall,surmounted by an iron railing. In the shadow of bank and wall the three turnedout of the road, and up a blind lane, of which the wallóthere, risen to someeight or ten feet highóformed one side. Crouching down in a corner, peeping upthe lane, the next object that Young Jerry saw, was the form of his honouredparent, pretty well defined against a watery and clouded moon, nimbly scaling aniron gate. He was soon over, and then the second fisherman got over, and thenthe third. They all dropped softly on the ground within the gate, and lay therea littleólistening perhaps. Then, they moved away on their hands andknees.            

It was now Young Jerryís turn to approach the gate: which he did, holding hisbreath. Crouching down again in a corner there, and looking in, he made out thethree fishermen creeping through some rank grass! and all the gravestones in thechurchyardóit was a large churchyard that they were inólooking on like ghosts inwhite, while the church tower itself looked on like the ghost of a monstrousgiant. They did not creep far, before they stopped and stood upright. And thenthey began to fish.            

They fished with a spade, at first. Presently the honoured parent appeared tobe adjusting some instrument like a great corkscrew. Whatever tools they workedwith, they worked hard, until the awful striking of the church clock soterrified Young Jerry, that he made off, with his hair as stiff as hisfatherís.            

But, his long-cherished desire to know more about these matters, not onlystopped him in his running away, but lured him back again. They were stillfishing perseveringly, when he peeped in at the gate for the second time; but,now they seemed to have got a bite. There was a screwing and complaining sounddown below, and their bent figures were strained, as if by a weight. By slowdegrees the weight broke away the earth upon it, and came to the surface. YoungJerry very well knew what it would be; but, when he saw it, and saw his honouredparent about to wrench it open, he was so frightened, being new to the sight,that he made off again, and never stopped until he had run a mile ormore.            

He would not have stopped then, for anything less necessary than breath, itbeing a spectral sort of race that he ran, and one highly desirable to get tothe end of. He had a strong idea that the coffin he had seen was running afterhim; and, pictured as hopping on behind him, bolt upright, upon its narrow end,always on the point of overtaking him and hopping on at his sideóperhaps takinghis armóit was a pursuer to shun. It was an inconsistent and ubiquitous fiendtoo, for, while it was making the whole night behind him dreadful, he darted outinto the roadway to avoid dark alleys, fearful of its coming hopping out of themlike a dropsical boyís-Kite without tail and wings. It hid in doorways too,rubbing its horrible shoulders against doors, and drawing them up to its ears,as if it were laughing. It got into shadows on the road, and lay cunningly onits back to trip him up. All this time it was incessantly hopping on behind andgaining on him, so that when the boy got to his own door he had reason for beinghalf dead. And even then it would not leave him, but followed him upstairs witha bump on every stair, scrambled into bed with him, and bumped down, dead andheavy, on his breast when he fell asleep.            

From his oppressed slumber, Young Jerry in his closet was awakened afterdaybreak and before sunrise, by the presence of his father in the family room.Something had gone wrong with him; at least, so Young Jerry inferred, from thecircumstance of his holding Mrs. Cruncher by the ears, and knocking the back ofher head against the head-board of the bed.            

ìI told you I would,î said Mr. Cruncher, ìand I did.î            

ìJerry, Jerry, Jerry!î his wife implored.            

ìYou oppose yourself to the profit of the business,î said Jerry, ìand me andmy partners suffer. You was to honour and obey; why the devil donít you?î            

ìI try to be a good wife, Jerry,î the poor woman protested, with tears.            

ìIs it being a good wife to oppose your husbandís business? Is it honouringyour husband to dishonour his business? Is it obeying your husband to disobeyhim on the wital subject of his business?î            

ìYou hadnít taken to the dreadful business then, Jerry.î            

ìItís enough for you,î retorted Mr. Cruncher, ìto be the wife of a honesttradesman, and not to occupy your female mind with calculations when he took tohis trade or when he didnít. A honouring and obeying wife would let his tradealone altogether. Call yourself a religious woman? If youíre a religious woman,give me a irreligious one! You have no more natíral sense of duty than the bedof this here Thames river has of a pile, and similarly it must be knocked intoyou.î            

The altercation was conducted in a low tone of voice, and terminated in thehonest tradesmanís kicking off his clay-soiled boots, and lying down at hislength on the floor. After taking a timid peep at him lying on his back, withhis rusty hands under his head for a pillow, his son lay down too, and fellasleep again.            

There was no fish for breakfast, and not much of anything else. Mr. Cruncherwas out of spirits, and out of temper, and kept an iron pot-lid by him as aprojectile for the correction of Mrs. Cruncher, in case he should observe anysymptoms of her saying Grace. He was brushed and washed at the usual hour, andset off with his son to pursue his ostensible calling.            

Young Jerry, walking with the stool under his arm at his fatherís side alongsunny and crowded Fleet-street, was a very different Young Jerry from him of theprevious night, running home through darkness and solitude from his grimpursuer. His cunning was fresh with the day, and his qualms were gone with thenightóin which particulars it is not improbable that he had compeers inFleet-street and the City of London, that fine morning.            

ìFather,î said Young Jerry, as they walked along: taking care to keep at armíslength and to have the stool well between them: ìwhatís aResurrection-Man?î            

Mr. Cruncher came to a stop on the pavement before he answered, ìHow should Iknow?î            

ìI thought you knowed everything, father,î said the artless boy.            

ìHem! Well,î returned Mr. Cruncher, going on again, and lifting off his hat togive his spikes free play, ìheís a tradesman.î            

ìWhatís his goods, father?î asked the brisk Young Jerry.            

ìHis goods,î said Mr. Cruncher, after turning it over in his mind, ìis abranch of Scientific goods.î            

ìPersonsí bodies, ainít it, father?î asked the lively boy.            

ìI believe it is something of that sort,î said Mr. Cruncher.            

ìOh, father, I should so like to be a Resurrection-Man when Iím quite growedup!î            

Mr. Cruncher was soothed, but shook his head in a dubious and moral way. ìItdepends upon how you dewelop your talents. Be careful to dewelop your talents,and never to say no more than you can help to nobody, and thereís no telling atthe present time what you may not come to be fit for.î As Young Jerry, thusencouraged, went on a few yards in advance, to plant the stool in the shadow ofthe Bar, Mr. Cruncher added to himself: ìJerry, you honest tradesman, thereíshopes wot that boy will yet be a blessing to you, and a recompense to you forhis mother!î            

There had been earlier drinking than usual in the wine-shop of MonsieurDefarge. As early as six oíclock in the morning, sallow faces peeping throughits barred windows had descried other faces within, bending over measures ofwine. Monsieur Defarge sold a very thin wine at the best of times, but it wouldseem to have been an unusually thin wine that he sold at this time. A sour wine,moreover, or a souring, for its influence on the mood of those who drank it wasto make them gloomy. No vivacious Bacchanalian flame leaped out of the pressedgrape of Monsieur Defarge: but, a smouldering fire that burnt in the dark, layhidden in the dregs of it.            

This had been the third morning in succession, on which there had been earlydrinking at the wine-shop of Monsieur Defarge. It had begun on Monday, and herewas Wednesday come. There had been more of early brooding than drinking; for,many men had listened and whispered and slunk about there from the time of theopening of the door, who could not have laid a piece of money on the counter tosave their souls. These were to the full as interested in the place, however, asif they could have commanded whole barrels of wine; and they glided from seat toseat, and from corner to corner, swallowing talk in lieu of drink, with greedylooks.            

Notwithstanding an unusual flow of company, the master of the wine-shop wasnot visible. He was not missed; for, nobody who crossed the threshold looked forhim, nobody asked for him, nobody wondered to see only Madame Defarge in herseat, presiding over the distribution of wine, with a bowl of battered smallcoins before her, as much defaced and beaten out of their original impress asthe small coinage of humanity from whose ragged pockets they had come.            

A suspended interest and a prevalent absence of mind, were perhaps observed bythe spies who looked in at the wine-shop, as they looked in at every place, highand low, from the kings palace to the criminalís gaol. Games at cardslanguished, players at dominoes musingly built towers with them, drinkers drewfigures on the tables with spilt drops of wine, Madame Defarge herself pickedout the pattern on her sleeve with her toothpick, and saw and heard somethinginaudible and invisible a long way off.            

Thus, Saint Antoine in this vinous feature of his, until midday. It was highnoontide, when two dusty men passed through his streets and under his swinginglamps: of whom, one was Monsieur Defarge: the other a mender of roads in a bluecap. All adust and athirst, the two entered the wine-shop. Their arrival hadlighted a kind of fire in the breast of Saint Antoine, fast spreading as theycame along, which stirred and flickered in flames of faces at most doors andwindows. Yet, no one had followed them, and no man spoke when they entered thewine-shop, though the eyes of every man there were turned upon them.            

ìGood day, gentlemen!î said Monsieur Defarge.            

It may have been a signal for loosening the general tongue. It elicited ananswering chorus of ìGood day!î            

ìIt is bad weather, gentlemen,î said Defarge, shaking his head.            

Upon which, every man looked at his neighbour, and then all cast down theireyes and sat silent. Except one man, who got up and went out.            

ìMy wife,î said Defarge aloud, addressing Madame Defarge: ìI have travelledcertain leagues with this good mender of roads, called Jacques. I met himóbyaccidentóa day and halfís journey out of Paris. He is a good child, this menderof roads, called Jacques. Give him to drink, my wife!î            

A second man got up and went out. Madame Defarge set wine before the mender ofroads called Jacques, who doffed his blue cap to the company, and drank. In thebreast of his blouse he carried some coarse dark bread; he ate of this betweenwhiles, and sat munching and drinking near Madame Defargeís counter. A third mangot up and went out.            

Defarge refreshed himself with a draught of wineóbut, he took less than wasgiven to the stranger, as being himself a man to whom it was no rarityóand stoodwaiting until the countryman had made his breakfast. He looked at no onepresent, and no one now looked at him; not even Madame Defarge, who had taken upher knitting, and was at work.            

ìHave you finished your repast, friend?î he asked, in due season.            

ìYes, thank you.î            

ìCome, then! You shall see the apartment that I told you you could occupy. Itwill suit you to a marvel.î            

Out of the wine-shop into the street, out of the street into a courtyard, outof the courtyard up a steep staircase, out of the staircase into a garret,óformerly the garret where a white-haired man sat on a low bench, stoopingforward and very busy, making shoes.            

No white-haired man was there now; but, the three men were there who had goneout of the wine-shop singly. And between them and the white-haired man afar off,was the one small link, that they had once looked in at him through the chinksin the wall.            

Defarge closed the door carefully, and spoke in a subdued voice:            

ìJacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques Three! This is the witness encountered byappointment, by me, Jacques Four. He will tell you all. Speak, JacquesFive!î            

The mender of roads, blue cap in hand, wiped his swarthy forehead with it, andsaid, ìWhere shall I commence, monsieur?î            

ìCommence,î was Monsieur Defargeís not unreasonable reply, ìat thecommencement.î            

ìI saw him then, messieurs,î began the mender of roads, ìa year ago thisrunning summer, underneath the carriage of the Marquis, hanging by the chain.Behold the manner of it. I leaving my work on the road, the sun going to bed,the carriage of the Marquis slowly ascending the hill, he hanging by thechainólike this.î            

Again the mender of roads went through the whole performance; in which heought to have been perfect by that time, seeing that it had been the infallibleresource and indispensable entertainment of his village during a wholeyear.            

Jacques One struck in, and asked if he had ever seen the man before?            

ìNever,î answered the mender of roads, recovering his perpendicular.            

Jacques Three demanded how he afterwards recognised him then?            

ìBy his tall figure,î said the mender of roads, softly, and with his finger athis nose. ìWhen Monsieur the Marquis demands that evening, ëSay, what is helike?í I make response, `Tall as a spectre.íî            

ìYou should have said, short as a dwarf,î returned Jacques Two.            

ìBut what did I know? The deed was not then accomplished, neither did heconfide in me. Observe! Under those circumstances even, I do not offer mytestimony. Monsieur the Marquis indicates me with his finger, standing near ourlittle fountain, and says, `To me! Bring that rascal!í My faith, messieurs, Ioffer nothing.î            

ìHe is right there, Jacques,î murmured Defarge, to him who had interrupted.ìGo on!î            

ìGood!î said the mender of roads, with an air of mystery. ìThe tall man islost, and he is soughtóhow many months? Nine, ten, eleven?î            

ìNo matter, the number,î said Defarge. ìHe is well hidden, but at last he isunluckily found. Go on!î            

ìI am again at work upon the hill-side, and the sun is again about to go tobed. I am collecting my tools to descend to my cottage down in the villagebelow, where it is already dark, when I raise my eyes, and see coming over thehill six soldiers. In the midst of them is a tall man with his arms boundótiedto his sidesólike this!î            

With the aid of his indispensable cap, he represented a man with his elbowsbound fast at his hips, with cords that were knotted behind him.            

ìI stand aside, messieurs, by my heap of stones, to see the soldiers and theirprisoner pass (for it is a solitary road, that, where any spectacle is wellworth looking at), and at first, as they approach, I see no more than that theyare six soldiers with a tall man bound, and that they are almost black to mysightóexcept on the side of the sun going to bed, where they have a red edge,messieurs. Also, I see that their long shadows are on the hollow ridge on theopposite side of the road, and are on the hill above it, and are like theshadows of giants. Also, I see that they are covered with dust, and that thedust moves with them as they come, tramp, tramp! But when they advance quitenear to me, I recognise the tall man, and he recognises me. Ah, but he would bewell content to precipitate himself over the hill-side once again, as on theevening when he and I first encountered, close to the same spot!î            

He described it as if he were there, and it was evident that he saw itvividly; perhaps he had not seen much in his life.            

ìI do not show the soldiers that I recognise the tall man; he does not showthe soldiers that he recognises me; we do it, and we know it, with our eyes.`Come on!í says the chief of that company, pointing to the village, `bring himfast to his tomb!í and they bring him faster. I follow. His arms are swelledbecause of being bound so tight, his wooden shoes are large and clumsy, and heis lame. Because he is lame, and consequently slow, they drive him with theirgunsólike this!î            

He imitated the action of a manís being impelled forward by the butt-ends ofmuskets.            

ìAs they descend the hill like madmen running a race, he falls. They laugh andpick him up again. His face is bleeding and covered with dust, but he cannottouch it; thereupon they laugh again. They bring him into the village; all thevillage runs to look; they take him past the mill, and up to the prison; all thevillage sees the prison gate open in the darkness of the night, and swallowhimólike this!î            

He opened his mouth as wide as he could, and shut it with a sounding snap ofhis teeth. Observant of his unwillingness to mar the effect by opening it again,Defarge said, ìGo on, Jacques.î            

ìAll the village,î pursued the mender of roads, on tiptoe and in a low voice,ìwithdraws; all the village whispers by the fountain; all the village sleeps;all the village dreams of that unhappy one, within the locks and bars of theprison on the crag, and never to come out of it, except to perish. In themorning, with my tools upon my shoulder, eating my morsel of black bread as Igo, I make a circuit by the prison, on my way to my work. There I see him, highup, behind the bars of a lofty iron cage, bloody and dusty as last night,looking through. He has no hand free, to wave to me; I dare not call to him; heregards me like a dead man.î            

Defarge and the three glanced darkly at one another. The looks of all of themwere dark, repressed, and revengeful, as they listened to the countrymanísstory; the manner of all of them, while it was secret, was authoritative too.They had the air of a rough tribunal; Jacques One and Two sitting on the oldpallet-bed, each with his chin resting on his hand, and his eyes intent on theroad-mender; Jacques Three, equally intent, on one knee behind them, with hisagitated hand always gliding over the network of fine nerves about his mouth andnose; Defarge standing between them and the narrator, whom he had stationed inthe light of the window, by turns looking from him to them, and from them tohim.            

ìGo on, Jacques,î said Defarge.            

ìHe remains up there in his iron cage some days. The village looks at him bystealth, for it is afraid. But it always looks up, from a distance, at theprison on the crag; and in the evening, when the work of the day is achieved andit assembles to gossip at the fountain, all faces are turned towards the prison.Formerly, they were turned towards the posting-house; now, they are turnedtowards the prison. They whisper at the fountain, that although condemned todeath he will not be executed; they say that petitions have been presented inParis, showing that he was enraged and made mad by the death of his child; theysay that a petition has been presented to the King himself. What do I know? Itis possible. Perhaps yes, perhaps no.î            

ìListen then, Jacques,î Number One of that name sternly interposed. ìKnow thata petition was presented to the King and Queen. All here, yourself excepted, sawthe King take it, in his carriage in the street, sitting beside the Queen. It isDefarge whom you see here, who, at the hazard of his life, darted out before thehorses, with the petition in his hand.î            

ìAnd once again listen, Jacques!î said the kneeling Number Three: his fingersever wandering over and over those fine nerves, with a strikingly greedy air, asif he hungered for somethingóthat was neither food nor drink; ìthe guard, horseand foot, surrounded the petitioner, and struck him blows. You hear?î            

ìI hear, messieurs.î            

ìGo on then,î said Defarge.            

ìAgain; on the other hand, they whisper at the fountain,î resumed thecountryman, ìthat he is brought down into our country to be executed on thespot, and that he will very certainly be executed. They even whisper thatbecause he has slain Monseigneur, and because Monseigneur was the father of histenantsóserfsówhat you willóhe will be executed as a parricide. One old man saysat the fountain, that his right hand, armed with the knife, will be burnt offbefore his face; that, into wounds which will be made in his arms, his breast,and his legs, there will be poured boiling oil, melted lead, hot resin, wax, andsulphur; finally, that he will be torn limb from limb by four strong horses.That old man says, all this was actually done to a prisoner who made an attempton the life of the late King, Louis Fifteen. But how do I know if he lies? I amnot a scholar.î            

ìListen once again then, Jacques!î said the man with the restless hand and thecraving air. ìThe name of that prisoner was Damiens, and it was all done in openday, in the open streets of this city of Paris; and nothing was more noticed inthe vast concourse that saw it done, than the crowd of ladies of quality andfashion, who were full of eager attention to the lastóto the last, Jacques,prolonged until nightfall, when he had lost two legs and an arm, and stillbreathed! And it was doneówhy, how old are you?î            

ìThirty-five,î said the mender of roads, who looked sixty.            

ìIt was done when you were more than ten years old; you might have seenit.î            

ìEnough!î said Defarge, with grim impatience. ìLong live the Devil! Goon.î            

ìWell! Some whisper this, some whisper that; they speak of nothing else; eventhe fountain appears to fall to that tune. At length, on Sunday night when allthe village is asleep, come soldiers, winding down from the prison, and theirguns ring on the stones of the little street. Workmen dig, workmen hammer,soldiers laugh and sing; in the morning, by the fountain, there is raised agallows forty feet high, poisoning the water.î            

The mender of roads looked THROUGH rather than AT the low ceiling, and pointedas if he saw the gallows somewhere in the sky.            

ìAll work is stopped, all assemble there, nobody leads the cows out, the cowsare there with the rest. At midday, the roll of drums. Soldiers have marchedinto the prison in the night, and he is in the midst of many soldiers. He isbound as before, and in his mouth there is a gagótied so, with a tight string,making him look almost as if he laughed.î He suggested it, by creasing his facewith his two thumbs, from the corners of his mouth to his ears. ìOn the top ofthe gallows is fixed the knife, blade upwards, with its point in the air. He ishanged there forty feet highóand is left hanging, poisoning the water.î            

They looked at one another, as he used his blue cap to wipe his face, on whichthe perspiration had started afresh while he recalled the spectacle.            

ìIt is frightful, messieurs. How can the women and the children draw water!Who can gossip of an evening, under that shadow! Under it, have I said? When Ileft the village, Monday evening as the sun was going to bed, and looked backfrom the hill, the shadow struck across the church, across the mill, across theprisonóseemed to strike across the earth, messieurs, to where the sky rests uponit!î            

The hungry man gnawed one of his fingers as he looked at the other three, andhis finger quivered with the craving that was on him.            

ìThatís all, messieurs. I left at sunset (as I had been warned to do), and Iwalked on, that night and half next day, until I met (as I was warned I should)this comrade. With him, I came on, now riding and now walking, through the restof yesterday and through last night. And here you see me!î            

After a gloomy silence, the first Jacques said, ìGood! You have acted andrecounted faithfully. Will you wait for us a little, outside the door?î            

ìVery willingly,î said the mender of roads. Whom Defarge escorted to the topof the stairs, and, leaving seated there, returned.            

The three had risen, and their heads were together when he came back to thegarret.            

ìHow say you, Jacques?î demanded Number One. ìTo be registered?î            

ìTo be registered, as doomed to destruction,î returned Defarge.            

ìMagnificent!î croaked the man with the craving.            

ìThe chateau, and all the race?î inquired the first.            

ìThe chateau and all the race,î returned Defarge. ìExtermination.î            

The hungry man repeated, in a rapturous croak, ìMagnificent!î and begangnawing another finger.            

ìAre you sure,î asked Jacques Two, of Defarge, ìthat no embarrassment canarise from our manner of keeping the register? Without doubt it is safe, for noone beyond ourselves can decipher it; but shall we always be able to decipheritóor, I ought to say, will she?î            

ìJacques,î returned Defarge, drawing himself up, ìif madame my wife undertookto keep the register in her memory alone, she would not lose a word of itónot asyllable of it. Knitted, in her own stitches and her own symbols, it will alwaysbe as plain to her as the sun. Confide in Madame Defarge. It would be easier forthe weakest poltroon that lives, to erase himself from existence, than to eraseone letter of his name or crimes from the knitted register of MadameDefarge.î            

There was a murmur of confidence and approval, and then the man who hungered,asked: ìIs this rustic to be sent back soon? I hope so. He is very simple; is henot a little dangerous?î            

ìHe knows nothing,î said Defarge; ìat least nothing more than would easilyelevate himself to a gallows of the same height. I charge myself with him; lethim remain with me; I will take care of him, and set him on his road. He wishesto see the fine worldóthe King, the Queen, and Court; let him see them onSunday.î            

ìWhat?î exclaimed the hungry man, staring. ìIs it a good sign, that he wishesto see Royalty and Nobility?î            

ìJacques,î said Defarge; ìjudiciously show a cat milk, if you wish her tothirst for it. Judiciously show a dog his natural prey, if you wish him to bringit down one day.î            

Nothing more was said, and the mender of roads, being found already dozing onthe topmost stair, was advised to lay himself down on the pallet-bed and takesome rest. He needed no persuasion, and was soon asleep.            

Worse quarters than Defargeís wine-shop, could easily have been found in Parisfor a provincial slave of that degree. Saving for a mysterious dread of madameby which he was constantly haunted, his life was very new and agreeable. But,madame sat all day at her counter, so expressly unconscious of him, and soparticularly determined not to perceive that his being there had any connectionwith anything below the surface, that he shook in his wooden shoes whenever hiseye lighted on her. For, he contended with himself that it was impossible toforesee what that lady might pretend next; and he felt assured that if sheshould take it into her brightly ornamented head to pretend that she had seenhim do a murder and afterwards flay the victim, she would infallibly go throughwith it until the play was played out.            

Therefore, when Sunday came, the mender of roads was not enchanted (though hesaid he was) to find that madame was to accompany monsieur and himself toVersailles. It was additionally disconcerting to have madame knitting all theway there, in a public conveyance; it was additionally disconcerting yet, tohave madame in the crowd in the afternoon, still with her knitting in her handsas the crowd waited to see the carriage of the King and Queen.            

ìYou work hard, madame,î said a man near her.            

ìYes,î answered Madame Defarge; ìI have a good deal to do.î            

ìWhat do you make, madame?î            

ìMany things.î            

ìFor instanceóî            

ìFor instance,î returned Madame Defarge, composedly, ìshrouds.î            

The man moved a little further away, as soon as he could, and the mender ofroads fanned himself with his blue cap: feeling it mightily close andoppressive. If he needed a King and Queen to restore him, he was fortunate inhaving his remedy at hand; for, soon the large-faced King and the fair-facedQueen came in their golden coach, attended by the shining Bullís Eye of theirCourt, a glittering multitude of laughing ladies and fine lords; and in jewelsand silks and powder and splendour and elegantly spurning figures and handsomelydisdainful faces of both sexes, the mender of roads bathed himself, so much tohis temporary intoxication, that he cried Long live the King, Long live theQueen, Long live everybody and everything! as if he had never heard ofubiquitous Jacques in his time. Then, there were gardens, courtyards, terraces,fountains, green banks, more King and Queen, more Bullís Eye, more lords andladies, more Long live they all! until he absolutely wept with sentiment. Duringthe whole of this scene, which lasted some three hours, he had plenty ofshouting and weeping and sentimental company, and throughout Defarge held him bythe collar, as if to restrain him from flying at the objects of his briefdevotion and tearing them to pieces.            

ìBravo!î said Defarge, clapping him on the back when it was over, like apatron; ìyou are a good boy!î            

The mender of roads was now coming to himself, and was mistrustful of havingmade a mistake in his late demonstrations; but no.            

ìYou are the fellow we want,î said Defarge, in his ear; ìyou make these foolsbelieve that it will last for ever. Then, they are the more insolent, and it isthe nearer ended.î            

ìHey!î cried the mender of roads, reflectively; ìthatís true.î            

ìThese fools know nothing. While they despise your breath, and would stop itfor ever and ever, in you or in a hundred like you rather than in one of theirown horses or dogs, they only know what your breath tells them. Let it deceivethem, then, a little longer; it cannot deceive them too much.î            

Madame Defarge looked superciliously at the client, and nodded inconfirmation.            

ìAs to you,î said she, ìyou would shout and shed tears for anything, if itmade a show and a noise. Say! Would you not?î            

ìTruly, madame, I think so. For the moment.î            

ìIf you were shown a great heap of dolls, and were set upon them to pluck themto pieces and despoil them for your own advantage, you would pick out therichest and gayest. Say! Would you not?î            

ìTruly yes, madame.î            

ìYes. And if you were shown a flock of birds, unable to fly, and were set uponthem to strip them of their feathers for your own advantage, you would set uponthe birds of the finest feathers; would you not?î            

ìIt is true, madame.î            

ìYou have seen both dolls and birds to-day,î said Madame Defarge, with a waveof her hand towards the place where they had last been apparent; ìnow, gohome!î            

Madame Defarge and monsieur her husband returned amicably to the bosom ofSaint Antoine, while a speck in a blue cap toiled through the darkness, andthrough the dust, and down the weary miles of avenue by the wayside, slowlytending towards that point of the compass where the chateau of Monsieur theMarquis, now in his grave, listened to the whispering trees. Such ample leisurehad the stone faces, now, for listening to the trees and to the fountain, thatthe few village scarecrows who, in their quest for herbs to eat and fragments ofdead stick to burn, strayed within sight of the great stone courtyard andterrace staircase, had it borne in upon their starved fancy that the expressionof the faces was altered. A rumour just lived in the villageóhad a faint andbare existence there, as its people hadóthat when the knife struck home, thefaces changed, from faces of pride to faces of anger and pain; also, that whenthat dangling figure was hauled up forty feet above the fountain, they changedagain, and bore a cruel look of being avenged, which they would henceforth bearfor ever. In the stone face over the great window of the bed-chamber where themurder was done, two fine dints were pointed out in the sculptured nose, whicheverybody recognised, and which nobody had seen of old; and on the scarceoccasions when two or three ragged peasants emerged from the crowd to take ahurried peep at Monsieur the Marquis petrified, a skinny finger would not havepointed to it for a minute, before they all started away among the moss andleaves, like the more fortunate hares who could find a living there.            

Chateau and hut, stone face and dangling figure, the red stain on the stonefloor, and the pure water in the village wellóthousands of acres of landóa wholeprovince of Franceóall France itselfólay under the night sky, concentrated intoa faint hair-breadth line. So does a whole world, with all its greatnesses andlittlenesses, lie in a twinkling star. And as mere human knowledge can split aray of light and analyse the manner of its composition, so, sublimerintelligences may read in the feeble shining of this earth of ours, everythought and act, every vice and virtue, of every responsible creature onit.            

The Defarges, husband and wife, came lumbering under the starlight, in theirpublic vehicle, to that gate of Paris whereunto their journey naturally tended.There was the usual stoppage at the barrier guardhouse, and the usual lanternscame glancing forth for the usual examination and inquiry. Monsieur Defargealighted; knowing one or two of the soldiery there, and one of the police. Thelatter he was intimate with, and affectionately embraced.            

When Saint Antoine had again enfolded the Defarges in his dusky wings, andthey, having finally alighted near the Saintís boundaries, were picking theirway on foot through the black mud and offal of his streets, Madame Defarge spoketo her husband:            

ìSay then, my friend; what did Jacques of the police tell thee?î            

ìVery little to-night, but all he knows. There is another spy commissioned forour quarter. There may be many more, for all that he can say, but he knows ofone.î            

ìEh well!î said Madame Defarge, raising her eyebrows with a cool business air.ìIt is necessary to register him. How do they call that man?î            

ìHe is English.î            

ìSo much the better. His name?î            

ìBarsad,î said Defarge, making it French by pronunciation. But, he had been socareful to get it accurately, that he then spelt it with perfectcorrectness.            

ìBarsad,î repeated madame. ìGood. Christian name?î            

ìJohn.î            

ìJohn Barsad,î repeated madame, after murmuring it once to herself. ìGood. Hisappearance; is it known?î            

ìAge, about forty years; height, about five feet nine; black hair; complexiondark; generally, rather handsome visage; eyes dark, face thin, long, and sallow;nose aquiline, but not straight, having a peculiar inclination towards the leftcheek; expression, therefore, sinister.î            

ìEh my faith. It is a portrait!î said madame, laughing. ìHe shall beregistered to-morrow.î            

They turned into the wine-shop, which was closed (for it was midnight), andwhere Madame Defarge immediately took her post at her desk, counted the smallmoneys that had been taken during her absence, examined the stock, went throughthe entries in the book, made other entries of her own, checked the serving manin every possible way, and finally dismissed him to bed. Then she turned out thecontents of the bowl of money for the second time, and began knotting them up inher handkerchief, in a chain of separate knots, for safe keeping through thenight. All this while, Defarge, with his pipe in his mouth, walked up and down,complacently admiring, but never interfering; in which condition, indeed, as tothe business and his domestic affairs, he walked up and down throughlife.            

The night was hot, and the shop, close shut and surrounded by so foul aneighbourhood, was ill-smelling. Monsieur Defargeís olfactory sense was by nomeans delicate, but the stock of wine smelt much stronger than it ever tasted,and so did the stock of rum and brandy and aniseed. He whiffed the compound ofscents away, as he put down his smoked-out pipe.            

ìYou are fatigued,î said madame, raising her glance as she knotted the money.ìThere are only the usual odours.î            

ìI am a little tired,î her husband acknowledged.            

ìYou are a little depressed, too,î said madame, whose quick eyes had neverbeen so intent on the accounts, but they had had a ray or two for him. ìOh, themen, the men!î            

ìBut my dear!î began Defarge.            

ìBut my dear!î repeated madame, nodding firmly; ìbut my dear! You are faint ofheart to-night, my dear!î            

ìWell, then,î said Defarge, as if a thought were wrung out of his breast, ìitIS a long time.î            

ìIt is a long time,î repeated his wife; ìand when is it not a long time?Vengeance and retribution require a long time; it is the rule.î            

ìIt does not take a long time to strike a man with Lightning,î saidDefarge.            

ìHow long,î demanded madame, composedly, ìdoes it take to make and store thelightning? Tell me.î            

Defarge raised his head thoughtfully, as if there were something in thattoo.            

ìIt does not take a long time,î said madame, ìfor an earthquake to swallow atown. Eh well! Tell me how long it takes to prepare the earthquake?î            

ìA long time, I suppose,î said Defarge.            

ìBut when it is ready, it takes place, and grinds to pieces everything beforeit. In the meantime, it is always preparing, though it is not seen or heard.That is your consolation. Keep it.î            

She tied a knot with flashing eyes, as if it throttled a foe.            

ìI tell thee,î said madame, extending her right hand, for emphasis, ìthatalthough it is a long time on the road, it is on the road and coming. I tellthee it never retreats, and never stops. I tell thee it is always advancing.Look around and consider the lives of all the world that we know, consider thefaces of all the world that we know, consider the rage and discontent to whichthe Jacquerie addresses itself with more and more of certainty every hour. Cansuch things last? Bah! I mock you.î            

ìMy brave wife,î returned Defarge, standing before her with his head a littlebent, and his hands clasped at his back, like a docile and attentive pupilbefore his catechist, ìI do not question all this. But it has lasted a longtime, and it is possibleóyou know well, my wife, it is possibleóthat it may notcome, during our lives.î            

ìEh well! How then?î demanded madame, tying another knot, as if there wereanother enemy strangled.            

ìWell!î said Defarge, with a half complaining and half apologetic shrug. ìWeshall not see the triumph.î            

ìWe shall have helped it,î returned madame, with her extended hand in strongaction. ìNothing that we do, is done in vain. I believe, with all my soul, thatwe shall see the triumph. But even if not, even if I knew certainly not, show methe neck of an aristocrat and tyrant, and still I wouldóî            

Then madame, with her teeth set, tied a very terrible knot indeed.            

ìHold!î cried Defarge, reddening a little as if he felt charged withcowardice; ìI too, my dear, will stop at nothing.î            

ìYes! But it is your weakness that you sometimes need to see your victim andyour opportunity, to sustain you. Sustain yourself without that. When the timecomes, let loose a tiger and a devil; but wait for the time with the tiger andthe devil chainedónot shownóyet always ready.î            

Madame enforced the conclusion of this piece of advice by striking her littlecounter with her chain of money as if she knocked its brains out, and thengathering the heavy handkerchief under her arm in a serene manner, and observingthat it was time to go to bed.            

Next noontide saw the admirable woman in her usual place in the wine-shop,knitting away assiduously. A rose lay beside her, and if she now and thenglanced at the flower, it was with no infraction of her usual preoccupied air.There were a few customers, drinking or not drinking, standing or seated,sprinkled about. The day was very hot, and heaps of flies, who were extendingtheir inquisitive and adventurous perquisitions into all the glutinous littleglasses near madame, fell dead at the bottom. Their decease made no impressionon the other flies out promenading, who looked at them in the coolest manner (asif they themselves were elephants, or something as far removed), until they metthe same fate. Curious to consider how heedless flies are! óperhaps they thoughtas much at Court that sunny summer day.            

A figure entering at the door threw a shadow on Madame Defarge which she feltto be a new one. She laid down her knitting, and began to pin her rose in herhead-dress, before she looked at the figure.            

It was curious. The moment Madame Defarge took up the rose, the customersceased talking, and began gradually to drop out of the wine-shop.            

ìGood day, madame,î said the new-comer.            

ìGood day, monsieur.î            

She said it aloud, but added to herself, as she resumed her knitting: ìHah!Good day, age about forty, height about five feet nine, black hair, generallyrather handsome visage, complexion dark, eyes dark, thin, long and sallow face,aquiline nose but not straight, having a peculiar inclination towards the leftcheek which imparts a sinister expression! Good day, one and all!î            

ìHave the goodness to give me a little glass of old cognac, and a mouthful ofcool fresh water, madame.î            

Madame complied with a polite air.            

ìMarvellous cognac this, madame!î            

It was the first time it had ever been so complemented, and Madame Defargeknew enough of its antecedents to know better. She said, however, that thecognac was flattered, and took up her knitting. The visitor watched her fingersfor a few moments, and took the opportunity of observing the place ingeneral.            

ìYou knit with great skill, madame.î            

ìI am accustomed to it.î            

ìA pretty pattern too!î            

ìYOU think so?î said madame, looking at him with a smile.            

ìDecidedly. May one ask what it is for?î            

ìPastime,î said madame, still looking at him with a smile while her fingersmoved nimbly.            

ìNot for use?î            

ìThat depends. I may find a use for it one day. If I doóWell,î said madame,drawing a breath and nodding her head with a stern kind of coquetry, ìIíll useit!î            

It was remarkable; but, the taste of Saint Antoine seemed to be decidedlyopposed to a rose on the head-dress of Madame Defarge. Two men had enteredseparately, and had been about to order drink, when, catching sight of thatnovelty, they faltered, made a pretence of looking about as if for some friendwho was not there, and went away. Nor, of those who had been there when thisvisitor entered, was there one left. They had all dropped off. The spy had kepthis eyes open, but had been able to detect no sign. They had lounged away in apoverty-stricken, purposeless, accidental manner, quite natural andunimpeachable.            

ìJOHN,î thought madame, checking off her work as her fingers knitted, and hereyes looked at the stranger. ìStay long enough, and I shall knit `BARSADí beforeyou go.î            

ìYou have a husband, madame?î            

ìI have.î            

ìChildren?î            

ìNo children.î            

ìBusiness seems bad?î            

ìBusiness is very bad; the people are so poor.î            

ìAh, the unfortunate, miserable people! So oppressed, tooóas you say.î            

ìAs YOU say,î madame retorted, correcting him, and deftly knitting an extrasomething into his name that boded him no good.            

ìPardon me; certainly it was I who said so, but you naturally think so. Ofcourse.î            

ìI think?î returned madame, in a high voice. ìI and myhusband have enough to do to keep this wine-shop open, without thinking. All wethink, here, is how to live. That is the subject WE think of, and it gives us,from morning to night, enough to think about, without embarrassing our headsconcerning others. I think for others? No, no.î            

The spy, who was there to pick up any crumbs he could find or make, did notallow his baffled state to express itself in his sinister face; but, stood withan air of gossiping gallantry, leaning his elbow on Madame Defargeís littlecounter, and occasionally sipping his cognac.            

ìA bad business this, madame, of Gaspardís execution. Ah! the poor Gaspard!îWith a sigh of great compassion.            

ìMy faith!î returned madame, coolly and lightly, ìif people use knives forsuch purposes, they have to pay for it. He knew beforehand what the price of hisluxury was; he has paid the price.î             

ìI believe,î said the spy, dropping his soft voice to a tone that invitedconfidence, and expressing an injured revolutionary susceptibility in everymuscle of his wicked face: ìI believe there is much compassion and anger in thisneighbourhood, touching the poor fellow? Between ourselves.î            

ìIs there?î asked madame, vacantly.            

ìIs there not?î            

ìóHere is my husband!î said Madame Defarge.            

As the keeper of the wine-shop entered at the door, the spy saluted him bytouching his hat, and saying, with an engaging smile, ìGood day, Jacques!îDefarge stopped short, and stared at him.            

ìGood day, Jacques!î the spy repeated; with not quite so much confidence, orquite so easy a smile under the stare.            

ìYou deceive yourself, monsieur,î returned the keeper of the wine-shop. ìYoumistake me for another. That is not my name. I am Ernest Defarge.î            

ìIt is all the same,î said the spy, airily, but discomfited too: ìgoodday!î            

ìGood day!î answered Defarge, drily.            

ìI was saying to madame, with whom I had the pleasure of chatting when youentered, that they tell me there isóand no wonder! ómuch sympathy and anger inSaint Antoine, touching the unhappy fate of poor Gaspard.î            

ìNo one has told me so,î said Defarge, shaking his head. ìI know nothing ofit.î            

Having said it, he passed behind the little counter, and stood with his handon the back of his wifeís chair, looking over that barrier at the person to whomthey were both opposed, and whom either of them would have shot with thegreatest satisfaction.            

The spy, well used to his business, did not change his unconscious attitude,but drained his little glass of cognac, took a sip of fresh water, and asked foranother glass of cognac. Madame Defarge poured it out for him, took to herknitting again, and hummed a little song over it.            

ìYou seem to know this quarter well; that is to say, better than I do?îobserved Defarge.            

ìNot at all, but I hope to know it better. I am so profoundly interested inits miserable inhabitants.î            

ìHah!î muttered Defarge.            

ìThe pleasure of conversing with you, Monsieur Defarge, recalls to me,îpursued the spy, ìthat I have the honour of cherishing some interestingassociations with your name.î            

ìIndeed!î said Defarge, with much indifference.            

ìYes, indeed. When Doctor Manette was released, you, his old domestic, had thecharge of him, I know. He was delivered to you. You see I am informed of thecircumstances?î            

ìSuch is the fact, certainly,î said Defarge. He had had it conveyed to him, inan accidental touch of his wifeís elbow as she knitted and warbled, that hewould do best to answer, but always with brevity.            

ìIt was to you,î said the spy, ìthat his daughter came; and it was from yourcare that his daughter took him, accompanied by a neat brown monsieur; how is hecalled? óin a little wigóLorryóof the bank of Tellson and Companyóover toEngland.î            

ìSuch is the fact,î repeated Defarge.            

ìVery interesting remembrances!î said the spy. ìI have known Doctor Manetteand his daughter, in England.î            

ìYes?î said Defarge.            

ìYou donít hear much about them now?î said the spy.            

ìNo,î said Defarge.            

ìIn effect,î madame struck in, looking up from her work and her little song,ìwe never hear about them. We received the news of their safe arrival, andperhaps another letter, or perhaps two; but, since then, they have graduallytaken their road in lifeówe, oursóand we have held no correspondence.î            

ìPerfectly so, madame,î replied the spy. ìShe is going to be married.î            

ìGoing?î echoed madame. ìShe was pretty enough to have been married long ago.You English are cold, it seems to me.î            

ìOh! You know I am English.î            

ìI perceive your tongue is,î returned madame; ìand what the tongue is, Isuppose the man is.î            

He did not take the identification as a compliment; but he made the best ofit, and turned it off with a laugh. After sipping his cognac to the end, headded:            

ìYes, Miss Manette is going to be married. But not to an Englishman; to onewho, like herself, is French by birth. And speaking of Gaspard (ah, poorGaspard! It was cruel, cruel!), it is a curious thing that she is going to marrythe nephew of Monsieur the Marquis, for whom Gaspard was exalted to that heightof so many feet; in other words, the present Marquis. But he lives unknown inEngland, he is no Marquis there; he is Mr. Charles Darnay. DíAulnais is the nameof his motherís family.î            

Madame Defarge knitted steadily, but the intelligence had a palpable effectupon her husband. Do what he would, behind the little counter, as to thestriking of a light and the lighting of his pipe, he was troubled, and his handwas not trustworthy. The spy would have been no spy if he had failed to see it,or to record it in his mind.            

Having made, at least, this one hit, whatever it might prove to be worth, andno customers coming in to help him to any other, Mr. Barsad paid for what he haddrunk, and took his leave: taking occasion to say, in a genteel manner, beforehe departed, that he looked forward to the pleasure of seeing Monsieur andMadame Defarge again. For some minutes after he had emerged into the outerpresence of Saint Antoine, the husband and wife remained exactly as he had leftthem, lest he should come back.            

ìCan it be true,î said Defarge, in a low voice, looking down at his wife as hestood smoking with his hand on the back of her chair: ìwhat he has said ofMaíamselle Manette?î            

ìAs he has said it,î returned madame, lifting her eyebrows a little, ìit isprobably false. But it may be true.î            

ìIf it isóî Defarge began, and stopped.            

ìIf it is?î repeated his wife.            

ìóAnd if it does come, while we live to see it triumphóI hope, for her sake,Destiny will keep her husband out of France.î            

ìHer husbandís destiny,î said Madame Defarge, with her usual composure, ìwilltake him where he is to go, and will lead him to the end that is to end him.That is all I know.î            

ìBut it is very strangeónow, at least, is it not very strangeî ósaid Defarge,rather pleading with his wife to induce her to admit it, ìthat, after all oursympathy for Monsieur her father, and herself, her husbandís name should beproscribed under your hand at this moment, by the side of that infernal dogíswho has just left us?î            

ìStranger things than that will happen when it does come,î answered madame. ìIhave them both here, of a certainty; and they are both here for their merits;that is enough.î            

She rolled up her knitting when she had said those words, and presently tookthe rose out of the handkerchief that was wound about her head. Either SaintAntoine had an instinctive sense that the objectionable decoration was gone, orSaint Antoine was on the watch for its disappearance; howbeit, the Saint tookcourage to lounge in, very shortly afterwards, and the wine-shop recovered itshabitual aspect.            

In the evening, at which season of all others Saint Antoine turned himselfinside out, and sat on door-steps and window-ledges, and came to the corners ofvile streets and courts, for a breath of air, Madame Defarge with her work inher hand was accustomed to pass from place to place and from group to group: aMissionaryóthere were many like herósuch as the world will do well never tobreed again. All the women knitted. They knitted worthless things; but, themechanical work was a mechanical substitute for eating and drinking; the handsmoved for the jaws and the digestive apparatus: if the bony fingers had beenstill, the stomachs would have been more famine-pinched.            

But, as the fingers went, the eyes went, and the thoughts. And as MadameDefarge moved on from group to group, all three went quicker and fiercer amongevery little knot of women that she had spoken with, and left behind.            

Her husband smoked at his door, looking after her with admiration. ìA greatwoman,î said he, ìa strong woman, a grand woman, a frightfully grandwoman!î            

Darkness closed around, and then came the ringing of church bells and thedistant beating of the military drums in the Palace Courtyard, as the women satknitting, knitting. Darkness encompassed them. Another darkness was closing inas surely, when the church bells, then ringing pleasantly in many an airysteeple over France, should be melted into thundering cannon; when the militarydrums should be beating to drown a wretched voice, that night all potent as thevoice of Power and Plenty, Freedom and Life. So much was closing in about thewomen who sat knitting, knitting, that they their very selves were closing inaround a structure yet unbuilt, where they were to sit knitting, knitting,counting dropping heads.            

Never did the sun go down with a brighter glory on the quiet corner in Soho,than one memorable evening when the Doctor and his daughter sat under theplane-tree together. Never did the moon rise with a milder radiance over greatLondon, than on that night when it found them still seated under the tree, andshone upon their faces through its leaves.            

Lucie was to be married to-morrow. She had reserved this last evening for herfather, and they sat alone under the plane-tree.            

"You are happy, my dear father?"            

"Quite, my child."            

They had said little, though they had been there a long time. When it was yetlight enough to work and read, she had neither engaged herself in her usualwork, nor had she read to him. She had employed herself in both ways, at hisside under the tree, many and many a time; but, this time was not quite like anyother, and nothing could make it so.            

"And I am very happy to-night, dear father. I am deeply happy in the love thatHeaven has so blessedómy love for Charles, and Charles's love for me. But, if mylife were not to be still consecrated to you, or if my marriage were so arrangedas that it would part us, even by the length of a few of these streets, I shouldbe more unhappy and self-reproachful now than I can tell you. Even as itisó"            

Even as it was, she could not command her voice.            

In the sad moonlight, she clasped him by the neck, and laid her face upon hisbreast. In the moonlight which is always sad, as the light of the sun itselfisóas the light called human life isóat its coming and its going.            

"Dearest dear! Can you tell me, this last time, that you feel quite, quitesure, no new affections of mine, and no new duties of mine, will ever interposebetween us? I know it well, but do you know it? In your ownheart, do you feel quite certain?"            

Her father answered, with a cheerful firmness of conviction he could scarcelyhave assumed, "Quite sure, my darling! More than that," he added, as he tenderlykissed her: "my future is far brighter, Lucie, seen through your marriage, thanit could have beenónay, than it ever wasówithout it."            

"If I could hope THAT, my father!ó"            

"Believe it, love! Indeed it is so. Consider how natural and how plain it is,my dear, that it should be so. You, devoted and young, cannot fully appreciatethe anxiety I have felt that your life should not be wastedó"            

She moved her hand towards his lips, but he took it in his, and repeated theword.            

"ówasted, my childóshould not be wasted, struck aside from the natural orderof thingsófor my sake. Your unselfishness cannot entirely comprehend how much mymind has gone on this; but, only ask yourself, how could my happiness beperfect, while yours was incomplete?"            

"If I had never seen Charles, my father, I should have been quite happy withyou."            

He smiled at her unconscious admission that she would have been unhappywithout Charles, having seen him; and replied:            

"My child, you did see him, and it is Charles. If it had not been Charles, itwould have been another. Or, if it had been no other, I should have been thecause, and then the dark part of my life would have cast its shadow beyondmyself, and would have fallen on you."            

It was the first time, except at the trial, of her ever hearing him refer tothe period of his suffering. It gave her a strange and new sensation while hiswords were in her ears; and she remembered it long afterwards.            

"See!" said the Doctor of Beauvais, raising his hand towards the moon. "I havelooked at her from my prison-window, when I could not bear her light. I havelooked at her when it has been such torture to me to think of her shining uponwhat I had lost, that I have beaten my head against my prison-walls. I havelooked at her, in a state so dun and lethargic, that I have thought of nothingbut the number of horizontal lines I could draw across her at the full, and thenumber of perpendicular lines with which I could intersect them." He added inhis inward and pondering manner, as he looked at the moon, "It was twenty eitherway, I remember, and the twentieth was difficult to squeeze in."            

The strange thrill with which she heard him go back to that time, deepened ashe dwelt upon it; but, there was nothing to shock her in the manner of hisreference. He only seemed to contrast his present cheerfulness and felicity withthe dire endurance that was over.            

"I have looked at her, speculating thousands of times upon the unborn childfrom whom I had been rent. Whether it was alive. Whether it had been born alive,or the poor mother's shock had killed it. Whether it was a son who would someday avenge his father. (There was a time in my imprisonment, when my desire forvengeance was unbearable.) Whether it was a son who would never know hisfather's story; who might even live to weigh the possibility of his father'shaving disappeared of his own will and act. Whether it was a daughter who wouldgrow to be a woman."            

She drew closer to him, and kissed his cheek and his hand.            

"I have pictured my daughter, to myself, as perfectly forgetful of meórather,altogether ignorant of me, and unconscious of me. I have cast up the years ofher age, year after year. I have seen her married to a man who knew nothing ofmy fate. I have altogether perished from the remembrance of the living, and inthe next generation my place was a blank."            

"My father! Even to hear that you had such thoughts of a daughter who neverexisted, strikes to my heart as if I had been that child."            

"You, Lucie? It is out of the Consolation and restoration you have brought tome, that these remembrances arise, and pass between us and the moon on this lastnight. óWhat did I say just now?"            

"She knew nothing of you. She cared nothing for you."            

"So! But on other moonlight nights, when the sadness and the silence havetouched me in a different wayóhave affected me with something as like asorrowful sense of peace, as any emotion that had pain for its foundationscouldóI have imagined her as coming to me in my cell, and leading me out intothe freedom beyond the fortress. I have seen her image in the moonlight often,as I now see you; except that I never held her in my arms; it stood between thelittle grated window and the door. But, you understand that that was not thechild I am speaking of?"            

"The figure was not; theótheóimage; the fancy?"            

"No. That was another thing. It stood before my disturbed sense of sight, butit never moved. The phantom that my mind pursued, was another and more realchild. Of her outward appearance I know no more than that she was like hermother. The other had that likeness tooóas you haveóbut was not the same. Canyou follow me, Lucie? Hardly, I think? I doubt you must have been a solitaryprisoner to understand these perplexed distinctions."            

His collected and calm manner could not prevent her blood from running cold,as he thus tried to anatomise his old condition.            

"In that more peaceful state, I have imagined her, in the moonlight, coming tome and taking me out to show me that the home of her married life was full ofher loving remembrance of her lost father. My picture was in her room, and I wasin her prayers. Her life was active, cheerful, useful; but my poor historypervaded it all."            

"I was that child, my father, I was not half so good, but in my love that wasI."            

"And she showed me her children," said the Doctor of Beauvais, "and they hadheard of me, and had been taught to pity me. When they passed a prison of theState, they kept far from its frowning walls, and looked up at its bars, andspoke in whispers. She could never deliver me; I imagined that she alwaysbrought me back after showing me such things. But then, blessed with the reliefof tears, I fell upon my knees, and blessed her."            

"I am that child, I hope, my father. O my dear, my dear, will you bless me asfervently to-morrow?"            

"Lucie, I recall these old troubles in the reason that I have to-night forloving you better than words can tell, and thanking God for my great happiness.My thoughts, when they were wildest, never rose near the happiness that I haveknown with you, and that we have before us."            

He embraced her, solemnly commended her to Heaven, and humbly thanked Heavenfor having bestowed her on him. By-and-bye, they went into the house.            

There was no one bidden to the marriage but Mr. Lorry; there was even to be nobridesmaid but the gaunt Miss Pross. The marriage was to make no change in theirplace of residence; they had been able to extend it, by taking to themselves theupper rooms formerly belonging to the apocryphal invisible lodger, and theydesired nothing more.            

Doctor Manette was very cheerful at the little supper. They were only three attable, and Miss Pross made the third. He regretted that Charles was not there;was more than half disposed to object to the loving little plot that kept himaway; and drank to him affectionately.            

So, the time came for him to bid Lucie good night, and they separated. But, inthe stillness of the third hour of the morning, Lucie came downstairs again, andstole into his room; not free from unshaped fears, beforehand.            

All things, however, were in their places; all was quiet; and he lay asleep,his white hair picturesque on the untroubled pillow, and his hands lying quieton the coverlet. She put her needless candle in the shadow at a distance, creptup to his bed, and put her lips to his; then, leaned over him, and looked athim.            

Into his handsome face, the bitter waters of captivity had worn; but, hecovered up their tracks with a determination so strong, that he held the masteryof them even in his sleep. A more remarkable face in its quiet, resolute, andguarded struggle with an unseen assailant, was not to be beheld in all the widedominions of sleep, that night.            

She timidly laid her hand on his dear breast, and put up a prayer that shemight ever be as true to him as her love aspired to be, and as his sorrowsdeserved. Then, she withdrew her hand, and kissed his lips once more, and wentaway. So, the sunrise came, and the shadows of the leaves of the plane-treemoved upon his face, as softly as her lips had moved in praying for him.            

The marriage-day was shining brightly, and they were ready outside the closeddoor of the Doctorís room, where he was speaking with Charles Darnay. They wereready to go to church; the beautiful bride, Mr. Lorry, and Miss Prossóto whomthe event, through a gradual process of reconcilement to the inevitable, wouldhave been one of absolute bliss, but for the yet lingering consideration thather brother Solomon should have been the bridegroom.            

ìAnd so,î said Mr. Lorry, who could not sufficiently admire the bride, and whohad been moving round her to take in every point of her quiet, pretty dress;ìand so it was for this, my sweet Lucie, that I brought you across the Channel,such a baby! Lord bless me! How little I thought what I was doing! How lightly Ivalued the obligation I was conferring on my friend Mr. Charles!î            

ìYou didnít mean it,î remarked the matter-of-fact Miss Pross, ìand thereforehow could you know it? Nonsense!î            

ìReally? Well; but donít cry,î said the gentle Mr. Lorry.            

ìI am not crying,î said Miss Pross; ìYOU are.î            

ìI, my Pross?î (By this time, Mr. Lorry dared to be pleasant with her, onoccasion.)            

ìYou were, just now; I saw you do it, and I donít wonder at it. Such a presentof plate as you have made ëem, is enough to bring tears into anybodyís eyes.Thereís not a fork or a spoon in the collection,î said Miss Pross, ìthat Ididnít cry over, last night after the box came, till I couldnít see it.î            

ìI am highly gratified,î said Mr. Lorry, ìthough, upon my honour, I had nointention of rendering those trifling articles of remembrance invisible to anyone. Dear me! This is an occasion that makes a man speculate on all he has lost.Dear, dear, dear! To think that there might have been a Mrs. Lorry, any timethese fifty years almost!î            

ìNot at all!î From Miss Pross.            

ìYou think there never might have been a Mrs. Lorry?î asked the gentleman ofthat name.            

ìPooh!î rejoined Miss Pross; ìyou were a bachelor in your cradle.î            

ìWell!î observed Mr. Lorry, beamingly adjusting his little wig, ìthat seemsprobable, too.î            

ìAnd you were cut out for a bachelor,î pursued Miss Pross, ìbefore you wereput in your cradle.î            

ìThen, I think,î said Mr. Lorry, ìthat I was very unhandsomely dealt with, andthat I ought to have had a voice in the selection of my pattern. Enough! Now, mydear Lucie,î drawing his arm soothingly round her waist, ìI hear them moving inthe next room, and Miss Pross and I, as two formal folks of business, areanxious not to lose the final opportunity of saying something to you that youwish to hear. You leave your good father, my dear, in hands as earnest and asloving as your own; he shall be taken every conceivable care of; during the nextfortnight, while you are in Warwickshire and thereabouts, even Tellsonís shallgo to the wall (comparatively speaking) before him. And when, at the fortnightísend, he comes to join you and your beloved husband, on your other fortnightístrip in Wales, you shall say that we have sent him to you in the best health andin the happiest frame. Now, I hear Somebodyís step coming to the door. Let mekiss my dear girl with an old-fashioned bachelor blessing, before Somebody comesto claim his own.î            

For a moment, he held the fair face from him to look at the well-rememberedexpression on the forehead, and then laid the bright golden hair against hislittle brown wig, with a genuine tenderness and delicacy which, if such thingsbe old-fashioned, were as old as Adam.            

The door of the Doctorís room opened, and he came out with Charles Darnay. Hewas so deadly paleówhich had not been the case when they went in togetheróthatno vestige of colour was to be seen in his face. But, in the composure of hismanner he was unaltered, except that to the shrewd glance of Mr. Lorry itdisclosed some shadowy indication that the old air of avoidance and dread hadlately passed over him, like a cold wind.            

He gave his arm to his daughter, and took her down-stairs to the chariot whichMr. Lorry had hired in honour of the day. The rest followed in another carriage,and soon, in a neighbouring church, where no strange eyes looked on, CharlesDarnay and Lucie Manette were happily married.            

Besides the glancing tears that shone among the smiles of the little groupwhen it was done, some diamonds, very bright and sparkling, glanced on thebrideís hand, which were newly released from the dark obscurity of one of Mr.Lorryís pockets. They returned home to breakfast, and all went well, and in duecourse the golden hair that had mingled with the poor shoemakerís white locks inthe Paris garret, were mingled with them again in the morning sunlight, on thethreshold of the door at parting.            

It was a hard parting, though it was not for long. But her father cheered her,and said at last, gently disengaging himself from her enfolding arms, ìTake her,Charles! She is yours!î            

And her agitated hand waved to them from a chaise window, and she wasgone.            

The corner being out of the way of the idle and curious, and the preparationshaving been very simple and few, the Doctor, Mr. Lorry, and Miss Pross, wereleft quite alone. It was when they turned into the welcome shade of the cool oldhall, that Mr. Lorry observed a great change to have come over the Doctor; as ifthe golden arm uplifted there, had struck him a poisoned blow.             

He had naturally repressed much, and some revulsion might have been expectedin him when the occasion for repression was gone. But, it was the old scaredlost look that troubled Mr. Lorry; and through his absent manner of clasping hishead and drearily wandering away into his own room when they got up-stairs, Mr.Lorry was reminded of Defarge the wine-shop keeper, and the starlightride.            

ìI think,î he whispered to Miss Pross, after anxious consideration, ìI thinkwe had best not speak to him just now, or at all disturb him. I must look in atTellsonís; so I will go there at once and come back presently. Then, we willtake him a ride into the country, and dine there, and all will be well.î            

It was easier for Mr. Lorry to look in at Tellsonís, than to look out ofTellsonís. He was detained two hours. When he came back, he ascended the oldstaircase alone, having asked no question of the servant; going thus into theDoctorís rooms, he was stopped by a low sound of knocking.            

ìGood God!î he said, with a start. ìWhatís that?î            

Miss Pross, with a terrified face, was at his ear. ìO me, O me! All is lost!îcried she, wringing her hands. ìWhat is to be told to Ladybird? He doesnít knowme, and is making shoes!î            

Mr. Lorry said what he could to calm her, and went himself into the Doctorísroom. The bench was turned towards the light, as it had been when he had seenthe shoemaker at his work before, and his head was bent down, and he was verybusy.            

ìDoctor Manette. My dear friend, Doctor Manette!î            

The Doctor looked at him for a momentóhalf inquiringly, half as if he wereangry at being spoken toóand bent over his work again.            

He had laid aside his coat and waistcoat; his shirt was open at the throat, asit used to be when he did that work; and even the old haggard, faded surface offace had come back to him. He worked hardóimpatientlyóas if in some sense ofhaving been interrupted.            

Mr. Lorry glanced at the work in his hand, and observed that it was a shoe ofthe old size and shape. He took up another that was lying by him, and asked whatit was.            

ìA young ladyís walking shoe,î he muttered, without looking up. ìIt ought tohave been finished long ago. Let it be.î            

ìBut, Doctor Manette. Look at me!î            

He obeyed, in the old mechanically submissive manner, without pausing in hiswork.            

ìYou know me, my dear friend? Think again. This is not your proper occupation.Think, dear friend!î            

Nothing would induce him to speak more. He looked up, for an instant at atime, when he was requested to do so; but, no persuasion would extract a wordfrom him. He worked, and worked, and worked, in silence, and words fell on himas they would have fallen on an echoless wall, or on the air. The only ray ofhope that Mr. Lorry could discover, was, that he sometimes furtively looked upwithout being asked. In that, there seemed a faint expression of curiosity orperplexityóas though he were trying to reconcile some doubts in his mind.            

Two things at once impressed themselves on Mr. Lorry, as important above allothers; the first, that this must be kept secret from Lucie; the second, that itmust be kept secret from all who knew him. In conjunction with Miss Pross, hetook immediate steps towards the latter precaution, by giving out that theDoctor was not well, and required a few days of complete rest. In aid of thekind deception to be practised on his daughter, Miss Pross was to write,describing his having been called away professionally, and referring to animaginary letter of two or three hurried lines in his own hand, represented tohave been addressed to her by the same post.            

These measures, advisable to be taken in any case, Mr. Lorry took in the hopeof his coming to himself. If that should happen soon, he kept another course inreserve; which was, to have a certain opinion that he thought the best, on theDoctorís case.            

In the hope of his recovery, and of resort to this third course being therebyrendered practicable, Mr. Lorry resolved to watch him attentively, with aslittle appearance as possible of doing so. He therefore made arrangements toabsent himself from Tellsonís for the first time in his life, and took his postby the window in the same room.            

He was not long in discovering that it was worse than useless to speak to him,since, on being pressed, he became worried. He abandoned that attempt on thefirst day, and resolved merely to keep himself always before him, as a silentprotest against the delusion into which he had fallen, or was falling. Heremained, therefore, in his seat near the window, reading and writing, andexpressing in as many pleasant and natural ways as he could think of, that itwas a free place.            

Doctor Manette took what was given him to eat and drink, and worked on, thatfirst day, until it was too dark to seeóworked on, half an hour after Mr. Lorrycould not have seen, for his life, to read or write. When he put his tools asideas useless, until morning, Mr. Lorry rose and said to him:            

ìWill you go out?î            

He looked down at the floor on either side of him in the old manner, looked upin the old manner, and repeated in the old low voice:            

ìOut?î            

ìYes; for a walk with me. Why not?î            

He made no effort to say why not, and said not a word more. But, Mr. Lorrythought he saw, as he leaned forward on his bench in the dusk, with his elbowson his knees and his head in his hands, that he was in some misty way askinghimself, ìWhy not?î The sagacity of the man of business perceived an advantagehere, and determined to hold it.            

Miss Pross and he divided the night into two watches, and observed him atintervals from the adjoining room. He paced up and down for a long time beforehe lay down; but, when he did finally lay himself down, he fell asleep. In themorning, he was up betimes, and went straight to his bench and to work.            

On this second day, Mr. Lorry saluted him cheerfully by his name, and spoke tohim on topics that had been of late familiar to them. He returned no reply, butit was evident that he heard what was said, and that he thought about it,however confusedly. This encouraged Mr. Lorry to have Miss Pross in with herwork, several times during the day; at those times, they quietly spoke of Lucie,and of her father then present, precisely in the usual manner, and as if therewere nothing amiss. This was done without any demonstrative accompaniment, notlong enough, or often enough to harass him; and it lightened Mr. Lorryísfriendly heart to believe that he looked up oftener, and that he appeared to bestirred by some perception of inconsistencies surrounding him.            

When it fell dark again, Mr. Lorry asked him as before:            

ìDear Doctor, will you go out?î            

As before, he repeated, ìOut?î            

ìYes; for a walk with me. Why not?î            

This time, Mr. Lorry feigned to go out when he could extract no answer fromhim, and, after remaining absent for an hour, returned. In the meanwhile, theDoctor had removed to the seat in the window, and had sat there looking down atthe plane-tree; but, on Mr. Lorryís return, he slipped away to his bench.            

The time went very slowly on, and Mr. Lorryís hope darkened, and his heartgrew heavier again, and grew yet heavier and heavier every day. The third daycame and went, the fourth, the fifth. Five days, six days, seven days, eightdays, nine days.            

With a hope ever darkening, and with a heart always growing heavier andheavier, Mr. Lorry passed through this anxious time. The secret was well kept,and Lucie was unconscious and happy; but he could not fail to observe that theshoemaker, whose hand had been a little out at first, was growing dreadfullyskilful, and that he had never been so intent on his work, and that his handshad never been so nimble and expert, as in the dusk of the ninth evening.            

Worn out by anxious watching, Mr. Lorry fell asleep at his post. On The tenthmorning of his suspense, he was startled by the shining of the sun into the roomwhere a heavy slumber had overtaken him when it was dark night.            

He rubbed his eyes and roused himself; but he doubted, when he had done so,whether he was not still asleep. For, going to the door of the Doctorís room andlooking in, he perceived that the shoemakerís bench and tools were put asideagain, and that the Doctor himself sat reading at the window. He was in hisusual morning dress, and his face (which Mr. Lorry could distinctly see), thoughstill very pale, was calmly studious and attentive.            

Even when he had satisfied himself that he was awake, Mr. Lorry felt giddilyuncertain for some few moments whether the late shoemaking might not be adisturbed dream of his own; for, did not his eyes show him his friend before himin his accustomed clothing and aspect, and employed as usual; and was there anysign within their range, that the change of which he had so strong an impressionhad actually happened?            

It was but the inquiry of his first confusion and astonishment, the answerbeing obvious. If the impression were not produced by a real corresponding andsufficient cause, how came he, Jarvis Lorry, there? How came he to have fallenasleep, in his clothes, on the sofa in Doctor Manetteís consulting-room, and tobe debating these points outside the Doctorís bedroom door in the earlymorning?            

Within a few minutes, Miss Pross stood whispering at his side. If he had hadany particle of doubt left, her talk would of necessity have resolved it; but hewas by that time clear-headed, and had none. He advised that they should let thetime go by until the regular breakfast-hour, and should then meet the Doctor asif nothing unusual had occurred. If he appeared to be in his customary state ofmind, Mr. Lorry would then cautiously proceed to seek direction and guidancefrom the opinion he had been, in his anxiety, so anxious to obtain.            

Miss Pross, submitting herself to his judgment, the scheme was worked out withcare. Having abundance of time for his usual methodical toilette, Mr. Lorrypresented himself at the breakfast-hour in his usual white linen, and with hisusual neat leg. The Doctor was summoned in the usual way, and came tobreakfast.            

So far as it was possible to comprehend him without overstepping thosedelicate and gradual approaches which Mr. Lorry felt to be the only safeadvance, he at first supposed that his daughterís marriage had taken placeyesterday. An incidental allusion, purposely thrown out, to the day of the week,and the day of the month, set him thinking and counting, and evidently made himuneasy. In all other respects, however, he was so composedly himself, that Mr.Lorry determined to have the aid he sought. And that aid was his own.            

Therefore, when the breakfast was done and cleared away, and he and the Doctorwere left together, Mr. Lorry said, feelingly:            

ìMy dear Manette, I am anxious to have your opinion, in confidence, on a verycurious case in which I am deeply interested; that is to say, it is very curiousto me; perhaps, to your better information it may be less so.î            

Glancing at his hands, which were discoloured by his late work, the Doctorlooked troubled, and listened attentively. He had already glanced at his handsmore than once.            

ìDoctor Manette,î said Mr. Lorry, touching him affectionately on the arm, ìthecase is the case of a particularly dear friend of mine. Pray give your mind toit, and advise me well for his sakeóand above all, for his daughterísóhisdaughterís, my dear Manette.î            

ìIf I understand,î said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, ìsome mentalshockó?î            

ìYes!î            

ìBe explicit,î said the Doctor. ìSpare no detail.î            

Mr. Lorry saw that they understood one another, and proceeded.            

ìMy dear Manette, it is the case of an old and a prolonged shock, of greatacuteness and severity to the affections, the feelings, theótheóas you expressitóthe mind. The mind. It is the case of a shock under which the sufferer wasborne down, one cannot say for how long, because I believe he cannot calculatethe time himself, and there are no other means of getting at it. It is the caseof a shock from which the sufferer recovered, by a process that he cannot tracehimselfóas I once heard him publicly relate in a striking manner. It is the caseof a shock from which he has recovered, so completely, as to be a highlyintelligent man, capable of close application of mind, and great exertion ofbody, and of constantly making fresh additions to his stock of knowledge, whichwas already very large. But, unfortunately, there has been,î he paused and tooka deep breathóîa slight relapse.î            

The Doctor, in a low voice, asked, ìOf how long duration?î            

ìNine days and nights.î            

ìHow did it show itself? I infer,î glancing at his hands again, ìin theresumption of some old pursuit connected with the shock?î            

ìThat is the fact.î            

ìNow, did you ever see him,î asked the Doctor, distinctly and collectedly,though in the same low voice, ìengaged in that pursuit originally?î            

ìOnce.î            

ìAnd when the relapse fell on him, was he in most respectsóor in allrespectsóas he was then?î            

ìI think in all respects.î            

ìYou spoke of his daughter. Does his daughter know of the relapse?î            

ìNo. It has been kept from her, and I hope will always be kept from her. It isknown only to myself, and to one other who may be trusted.î            

The Doctor grasped his hand, and murmured, ìThat was very kind. That was verythoughtful!î Mr. Lorry grasped his hand in return, and neither of the two spokefor a little while.            

ìNow, my dear Manette,î said Mr. Lorry, at length, in his most considerate andmost affectionate way, ìI am a mere man of business, and unfit to cope with suchintricate and difficult matters. I do not possess the kind of informationnecessary; I do not possess the kind of intelligence; I want guiding. There isno man in this world on whom I could so rely for right guidance, as on you. Tellme, how does this relapse come about? Is there danger of another? Could arepetition of it be prevented? How should a repetition of it be treated? Howdoes it come about at all? What can I do for my friend? No man ever can havebeen more desirous in his heart to serve a friend, than I am to serve mine, if Iknew how.            

ìBut I donít know how to originate, in such a case. If your sagacity,knowledge, and experience, could put me on the right track, I might be able todo so much; unenlightened and undirected, I can do so little. Pray discuss itwith me; pray enable me to see it a little more clearly, and teach me how to bea little more useful.î            

Doctor Manette sat meditating after these earnest words were spoken, and Mr.Lorry did not press him.            

ìI think it probable,î said the Doctor, breaking silence with an effort, ìthatthe relapse you have described, my dear friend, was not quite unforeseen by itssubject.î            

ìWas it dreaded by him?î Mr. Lorry ventured to ask.            

ìVery much.î He said it with an involuntary shudder.            

ìYou have no idea how such an apprehension weighs on the suffererís mind, andhow difficultóhow almost impossibleóit is, for him to force himself to utter aword upon the topic that oppresses him.î            

ìWould he,î asked Mr. Lorry, ìbe sensibly relieved if he could prevail uponhimself to impart that secret brooding to any one, when it is on him?î            

ìI think so. But it is, as I have told you, next to impossible. I even believeitóin some casesóto be quite impossible.î            

ìNow,î said Mr. Lorry, gently laying his hand on the Doctorís arm again, aftera short silence on both sides, ìto what would you refer this attack?î            

ìI believe,î returned Doctor Manette, ìthat there had been a strong andextraordinary revival of the train of thought and remembrance that was the firstcause of the malady. Some intense associations of a most distressing nature werevividly recalled, I think. It is probable that there had long been a dreadlurking in his mind, that those associations would be recalledósay, undercertain circumstancesósay, on a particular occasion. He tried to prepare himselfin vain; perhaps the effort to prepare himself made him less able to bearit.î            

ìWould he remember what took place in the relapse?î asked Mr. Lorry, withnatural hesitation.            

The Doctor looked desolately round the room, shook his head, and answered, ina low voice, ìNot at all.î            

ìNow, as to the future,î hinted Mr. Lorry.            

ìAs to the future,î said the Doctor, recovering firmness, ìI should have greathope. As it pleased Heaven in its mercy to restore him so soon, I should havegreat hope. He, yielding under the pressure of a complicated something, longdreaded and long vaguely foreseen and contended against, and recovering afterthe cloud had burst and passed, I should hope that the worst was over.î            

ìWell, well! Thatís good comfort. I am thankful!î said Mr. Lorry.            

ìI am thankful!î repeated the Doctor, bending his head with reverence.            

ìThere are two other points,î said Mr. Lorry, ìon which I am anxious to beinstructed. I may go on?î            

ìYou cannot do your friend a better service.î The Doctor gave him hishand.            

ìTo the first, then. He is of a studious habit, and unusually energetic; heapplies himself with great ardour to the acquisition of professional knowledge,to the conducting of experiments, to many things. Now, does he do toomuch?î            

ìI think not. It may be the character of his mind, to be always in singularneed of occupation. That may be, in part, natural to it; in part, the result ofaffliction. The less it was occupied with healthy things, the more it would bein danger of turning in the unhealthy direction. He may have observed himself,and made the discovery.î            

ìYou are sure that he is not under too great a strain?î            

ìI think I am quite sure of it.î            

ìMy dear Manette, if he were overworked nowóî            

ìMy dear Lorry, I doubt if that could easily be. There has been a violentstress in one direction, and it needs a counterweight.î            

ìExcuse me, as a persistent man of business. Assuming for a moment, that heWAS overworked; it would show itself in some renewal of this disorder?î            

ìI do not think so. I do not think,î said Doctor Manette with the firmness ofself-conviction, ìthat anything but the one train of association would renew it.I think that, henceforth, nothing but some extraordinary jarring of that chordcould renew it. After what has happened, and after his recovery, I find itdifficult to imagine any such violent sounding of that string again. I trust,and I almost believe, that the circumstances likely to renew it areexhausted.î            

He spoke with the diffidence of a man who knew how slight a thing wouldoverset the delicate organisation of the mind, and yet with the confidence of aman who had slowly won his assurance out of personal endurance and distress. Itwas not for his friend to abate that confidence. He professed himself morerelieved and encouraged than he really was, and approached his second and lastpoint. He felt it to be the most difficult of all; but, remembering his oldSunday morning conversation with Miss Pross, and remembering what he had seen inthe last nine days, he knew that he must face it.            

ìThe occupation resumed under the influence of this passing affliction sohappily recovered from,î said Mr. Lorry, clearing his throat, ìwe willcallóBlacksmithís work, Blacksmithís work. We will say, to put a case and forthe sake of illustration, that he had been used, in his bad time, to work at alittle forge. We will say that he was unexpectedly found at his forge again. Isit not a pity that he should keep it by him?î            

The Doctor shaded his forehead with his hand, and beat his foot nervously onthe ground.            

ìHe has always kept it by him,î said Mr. Lorry, with an anxious look at hisfriend. ìNow, would it not be better that he should let it go?î            

Still, the Doctor, with shaded forehead, beat his foot nervously on theground.            

ìYou do not find it easy to advise me?î said Mr. Lorry. ìI quite understand itto be a nice question. And yet I thinkóî And there he shook his head, andstopped.            

ìYou see,î said Doctor Manette, turning to him after an uneasy pause, ìit isvery hard to explain, consistently, the innermost workings of this poor manísmind. He once yearned so frightfully for that occupation, and it was so welcomewhen it came; no doubt it relieved his pain so much, by substituting theperplexity of the fingers for the perplexity of the brain, and by substituting,as he became more practised, the ingenuity of the hands, for the ingenuity ofthe mental torture; that he has never been able to bear the thought of puttingit quite out of his reach. Even now, when I believe he is more hopeful ofhimself than he has ever been, and even speaks of himself with a kind ofconfidence, the idea that he might need that old employment, and not find it,gives him a sudden sense of terror, like that which one may fancy strikes to theheart of a lost child.î            

He looked like his illustration, as he raised his eyes to Mr. Lorryísface.            

ìBut may notómind! I ask for information, as a plodding man of business whoonly deals with such material objects as guineas, shillings, and bank-notesómaynot the retention of the thing involve the retention of the idea? If the thingwere gone, my dear Manette, might not the fear go with it? In short, is it not aconcession to the misgiving, to keep the forge?î            

There was another silence.            

ìYou see, too,î said the Doctor, tremulously, ìit is such an oldcompanion.î            

ìI would not keep it,î said Mr. Lorry, shaking his head; for he gained infirmness as he saw the Doctor disquieted. ìI would recommend him to sacrificeit. I only want your authority. I am sure it does no good. Come! Give me yourauthority, like a dear good man. For his daughterís sake, my dearManette!î            

Very strange to see what a struggle there was within him!            

ìIn her name, then, let it be done; I sanction it. But, I would not take itaway while he was present. Let it be removed when he is not there; let him misshis old companion after an absence.î            

Mr. Lorry readily engaged for that, and the conference was ended. They passedthe day in the country, and the Doctor was quite restored. On the threefollowing days he remained perfectly well, and on the fourteenth day he wentaway to join Lucie and her husband. The precaution that had been taken toaccount for his silence, Mr. Lorry had previously explained to him, and he hadwritten to Lucie in accordance with it, and she had no suspicions.            

On the night of the day on which he left the house, Mr. Lorry went into hisroom with a chopper, saw, chisel, and hammer, attended by Miss Pross carrying alight. There, with closed doors, and in a mysterious and guilty manner, Mr.Lorry hacked the shoemakerís bench to pieces, while Miss Pross held the candleas if she were assisting at a murderófor which, indeed, in her grimness, she wasno unsuitable figure. The burning of the body (previously reduced to piecesconvenient for the purpose) was commenced without delay in the kitchen fire; andthe tools, shoes, and leather, were buried in the garden. So wicked dodestruction and secrecy appear to honest minds, that Mr. Lorry and Miss Pross,while engaged in the commission of their deed and in the removal of its traces,almost felt, and almost looked, like accomplices in a horrible crime.            

When the newly-married pair came home, the first person who appeared, to offerhis congratulations, was Sydney Carton. They had not been at home many hours,when he presented himself. He was not improved in habits, or in looks, or inmanner; but there was a certain rugged air of fidelity about him, which was newto the observation of Charles Darnay.            

He watched his opportunity of taking Darnay aside into a window, and ofspeaking to him when no one overheard.            

ìMr. Darnay,î said Carton, ìI wish we might be friends.î            

ìWe are already friends, I hope.î            

ìYou are good enough to say so, as a fashion of speech; but, I donít mean anyfashion of speech. Indeed, when I say I wish we might be friends, I scarcelymean quite that, either.î            

Charles Darnayóas was naturalóasked him, in all good-humour andgood-fellowship, what he did mean?            

ìUpon my life,î said Carton, smiling, ìI find that easier to comprehend in myown mind, than to convey to yours. However, let me try. You remember a certainfamous occasion when I was more drunk thanóthan usual?î            

ìI remember a certain famous occasion when you forced me to confess that youhad been drinking.î            

ìI remember it too. The curse of those occasions is heavy upon me, for Ialways remember them. I hope it may be taken into account one day, when all daysare at an end for me! Donít be alarmed; I am not going to preach.î            

ìI am not at all alarmed. Earnestness in you, is anything but alarming tome.î            

ìAh!î said Carton, with a careless wave of his hand, as if he waved that away.ìOn the drunken occasion in question (one of a large number, as you know), I wasinsufferable about liking you, and not liking you. I wish you would forgetit.î            

ìI forgot it long ago.î            

ìFashion of speech again! But, Mr. Darnay, oblivion is not so easy to me, asyou represent it to be to you. I have by no means forgotten it, and a lightanswer does not help me to forget it.î            

ìIf it was a light answer,î returned Darnay, ìI beg your forgiveness for it. Ihad no other object than to turn a slight thing, which, to my surprise, seems totrouble you too much, aside. I declare to you, on the faith of a gentleman, thatI have long dismissed it from my mind. Good Heaven, what was there to dismiss!Have I had nothing more important to remember, in the great service you renderedme that day?î            

ìAs to the great service,î said Carton, ìI am bound to avow to you, when youspeak of it in that way, that it was mere professional claptrap, I donít knowthat I cared what became of you, when I rendered it. óMind! I say when Irendered it; I am speaking of the past.î            

ìYou make light of the obligation,î returned Darnay, ìbut I will not quarrelwith YOUR light answer.î            

ìGenuine truth, Mr. Darnay, trust me! I have gone aside from my purpose; I wasspeaking about our being friends. Now, you know me; you know I am incapable ofall the higher and better flights of men. If you doubt it, ask Stryver, andheíll tell you so.î            

ìI prefer to form my own opinion, without the aid of his.î            

ìWell! At any rate you know me as a dissolute dog, who has never done anygood, and never will.î            

ìI donít know that you ënever will.íî            

ìBut I do, and you must take my word for it. Well! If you could endure to havesuch a worthless fellow, and a fellow of such indifferent reputation, coming andgoing at odd times, I should ask that I might be permitted to come and go as aprivileged person here; that I might be regarded as an useless (and I would add,if it were not for the resemblance I detected between you and me, anunornamental) piece of furniture, tolerated for its old service, and taken nonotice of. I doubt if I should abuse the permission. It is a hundred to one if Ishould avail myself of it four times in a year. It would satisfy me, I dare say,to know that I had it.î            

ìWill you try?î            

ìThat is another way of saying that I am placed on the footing I haveindicated. I thank you, Darnay. I may use that freedom with your name?î            

ìI think so, Carton, by this time.î            

They shook hands upon it, and Sydney turned away. Within a minute afterwards,he was, to all outward appearance, as unsubstantial as ever.            

When he was gone, and in the course of an evening passed with Miss Pross, theDoctor, and Mr. Lorry, Charles Darnay made some mention of this conversation ingeneral terms, and spoke of Sydney Carton as a problem of carelessness andrecklessness. He spoke of him, in short, not bitterly or meaning to bear hardupon him, but as anybody might who saw him as he showed himself.            

He had no idea that this could dwell in the thoughts of his fair young wife;but, when he afterwards joined her in their own rooms, he found her waiting forhim with the old pretty lifting of the forehead strongly marked.            

ìWe are thoughtful to-night!î said Darnay, drawing his arm about her.            

ìYes, dearest Charles,î with her hands on his breast, and the inquiring andattentive expression fixed upon him; ìwe are rather thoughtful to-night, for wehave something on our mind to-night.î            

ìWhat is it, my Lucie?î            

ìWill you promise not to press one question on me, if I beg you not to askit?î            

ìWill I promise? What will I not promise to my Love?î            

What, indeed, with his hand putting aside the golden hair from the cheek, andhis other hand against the heart that beat for him!            

ìI think, Charles, poor Mr. Carton deserves more consideration and respectthan you expressed for him to-night.î            

ìIndeed, my own? Why so?î            

ìThat is what you are not to ask me. But I thinkóI knowóhe does.î            

ìIf you know it, it is enough. What would you have me do, my Life?î            

ìI would ask you, dearest, to be very generous with him always, and verylenient on his faults when he is not by. I would ask you to believe that he hasa heart he very, very seldom reveals, and that there are deep wounds in it. Mydear, I have seen it bleeding.î            

ìIt is a painful reflection to me,î said Charles Darnay, quite astounded,ìthat I should have done him any wrong. I never thought this of him.î            

ìMy husband, it is so. I fear he is not to be reclaimed; there is scarcely ahope that anything in his character or fortunes is reparable now. But, I am surethat he is capable of good things, gentle things, even magnanimousthings.î            

She looked so beautiful in the purity of her faith in this lost man, that herhusband could have looked at her as she was for hours.            

ìAnd, O my dearest Love!î she urged, clinging nearer to him, laying her headupon his breast, and raising her eyes to his, ìremember how strong we are in ourhappiness, and how weak he is in his misery!î            

The supplication touched him home. ìI will always remember it, dear Heart! Iwill remember it as long as I live.î            

He bent over the golden head, and put the rosy lips to his, and folded her inhis arms. If one forlorn wanderer then pacing the dark streets, could have heardher innocent disclosure, and could have seen the drops of pity kissed away byher husband from the soft blue eyes so loving of that husband, he might havecried to the nightóand the words would not have parted from his lips for thefirst timeóìGod bless her for her sweet compassion!î            

A wonderful corner for echoes, it has been remarked, that corner where theDoctor lived. Ever busily winding the golden thread which bound her husband, andher father, and herself, and her old directress and companion, in a life ofquiet bliss, Lucie sat in the still house in the tranquilly resounding corner,listening to the echoing footsteps of years.            

At first, there were times, though she was a perfectly happy young wife, whenher work would slowly fall from her hands, and her eyes would be dimmed. For,there was something coming in the echoes, something light, afar off, andscarcely audible yet, that stirred her heart too much. Fluttering hopes anddoubtsóhopes, of a love as yet unknown to her: doubts, of her remaining uponearth, to enjoy that new delightódivided her breast. Among the echoes then,there would arise the sound of footsteps at her own early grave; and thoughts ofthe husband who would be left so desolate, and who would mourn for her so much,swelled to her eyes, and broke like waves.            

That time passed, and her little Lucie lay on her bosom. Then, among theadvancing echoes, there was the tread of her tiny feet and the sound of herprattling words. Let greater echoes resound as they would, the young mother atthe cradle side could always hear those coming. They came, and the shady housewas sunny with a childís laugh, and the Divine friend of children, to whom inher trouble she had confided hers, seemed to take her child in his arms, as Hetook the child of old, and made it a sacred joy to her.            

Ever busily winding the golden thread that bound them all together, weavingthe service of her happy influence through the tissue of all their lives, andmaking it predominate nowhere, Lucie heard in the echoes of years none butfriendly and soothing sounds. Her husbandís step was strong and prosperous amongthem; her fatherís firm and equal. Lo, Miss Pross, in harness of string,awakening the echoes, as an unruly charger, whip-corrected, snorting and pawingthe earth under the plane-tree in the garden!            

Even when there were sounds of sorrow among the rest, they were not harsh norcruel. Even when golden hair, like her own, lay in a halo on a pillow round theworn face of a little boy, and he said, with a radiant smile, ìDear papa andmamma, I am very sorry to leave you both, and to leave my pretty sister; but Iam called, and I must go!î those were not tears all of agony that wetted hisyoung motherís cheek, as the spirit departed from her embrace that had beenentrusted to it. Suffer them and forbid them not. They see my Fatherís face. OFather, blessed words!            

Thus, the rustling of an Angelís wings got blended with the other echoes, andthey were not wholly of earth, but had in them that breath of Heaven. Sighs ofthe winds that blew over a little garden-tomb were mingled with them also, andboth were audible to Lucie, in a hushed murmurólike the breathing of a summersea asleep upon a sandy shoreóas the little Lucie, comically studious at thetask of the morning, or dressing a doll at her motherís footstool, chattered inthe tongues of the Two Cities that were blended in her life.            

The Echoes rarely answered to the actual tread of Sydney Carton. Somehalf-dozen times a year, at most, he claimed his privilege of coming inuninvited, and would sit among them through the evening, as he had once doneoften. He never came there heated with wine. And one other thing regarding himwas whispered in the echoes, which has been whispered by all true echoes forages and ages.            

No man ever really loved a woman, lost her, and knew her with a blamelessthough an unchanged mind, when she was a wife and a mother, but her children hada strange sympathy with himóan instinctive delicacy of pity for him. What finehidden sensibilities are touched in such a case, no echoes tell; but it is so,and it was so here. Carton was the first stranger to whom little Lucie held outher chubby arms, and he kept his place with her as she grew. The little boy hadspoken of him, almost at the last. ìPoor Carton! Kiss him for me!î            

Mr. Stryver shouldered his way through the law, like some great engine forcingitself through turbid water, and dragged his useful friend in his wake, like aboat towed astern. As the boat so favoured is usually in a rough plight, andmostly under water, so, Sydney had a swamped life of it. But, easy and strongcustom, unhappily so much easier and stronger in him than any stimulating senseof desert or disgrace, made it the life he was to lead; and he no more thoughtof emerging from his state of lionís jackal, than any real jackal may besupposed to think of rising to be a lion. Stryver was rich; had married a floridwidow with property and three boys, who had nothing particularly shining aboutthem but the straight hair of their dumpling heads.            

These three young gentlemen, Mr. Stryver, exuding patronage of the mostoffensive quality from every pore, had walked before him like three sheep to thequiet corner in Soho, and had offered as pupils to Lucieís husband: delicatelysaying ìHalloa! here are three lumps of bread-and-cheese towards yourmatrimonial picnic, Darnay!î The polite rejection of the three lumps ofbread-and-cheese had quite bloated Mr. Stryver with indignation, which heafterwards turned to account in the training of the young gentlemen, bydirecting them to beware of the pride of Beggars, like that tutor-fellow. He wasalso in the habit of declaiming to Mrs. Stryver, over his full-bodied wine, onthe arts Mrs. Darnay had once put in practice to ìcatchî him, and on thediamond-cut-diamond arts in himself, madam, which had rendered him ìnot to becaught.î Some of his Kingís Bench familiars, who were occasionally parties tothe full-bodied wine and the lie, excused him for the latter by saying that hehad told it so often, that he believed it himselfówhich is surely such anincorrigible aggravation of an originally bad offence, as to justify any suchoffenderís being carried off to some suitably retired spot, and there hanged outof the way.            

These were among the echoes to which Lucie, sometimes pensive, sometimesamused and laughing, listened in the echoing corner, until her little daughterwas six years old. How near to her heart the echoes of her childís tread came,and those of her own dear fatherís, always active and self-possessed, and thoseof her dear husbandís, need not be told. Nor, how the lightest echo of theirunited home, directed by herself with such a wise and elegant thrift that it wasmore abundant than any waste, was music to her. Nor, how there were echoes allabout her, sweet in her ears, of the many times her father had told her that hefound her more devoted to him married (if that could be) than single, and of themany times her husband had said to her that no cares and duties seemed to divideher love for him or her help to him, and asked her ìWhat is the magic secret, mydarling, of your being everything to all of us, as if there were only one of us,yet never seeming to be hurried, or to have too much to do?î            

But, there were other echoes, from a distance, that rumbled menacingly in thecorner all through this space of time. And it was now, about little Lucieíssixth birthday, that they began to have an awful sound, as of a great storm inFrance with a dreadful sea rising.            

On a night in mid-July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine, Mr. Lorrycame in late, from Tellsonís, and sat himself down by Lucie and her husband inthe dark window. It was a hot, wild night, and they were all three reminded ofthe old Sunday night when they had looked at the lightning from the sameplace.            

ìI began to think,î said Mr. Lorry, pushing his brown wig back, ìthat I shouldhave to pass the night at Tellsonís. We have been so full of business all day,that we have not known what to do first, or which way to turn. There is such anuneasiness in Paris, that we have actually a run of confidence upon us! Ourcustomers over there, seem not to be able to confide their property to us fastenough. There is positively a mania among some of them for sending it toEngland.î            

ìThat has a bad look,î said Darnayó            

ìA bad look, you say, my dear Darnay? Yes, but we donít know what reason thereis in it. People are so unreasonable! Some of us at Tellsonís are getting old,and we really canít be troubled out of the ordinary course without dueoccasion.î            

ìStill,î said Darnay, ìyou know how gloomy and threatening the sky is.î            

ìI know that, to be sure,î assented Mr. Lorry, trying to persuade himself thathis sweet temper was soured, and that he grumbled, ìbut I am determined to bepeevish after my long dayís botheration. Where is Manette?î            

ìHere he is,î said the Doctor, entering the dark room at the moment.            

ìI am quite glad you are at home; for these hurries and forebodings by which Ihave been surrounded all day long, have made me nervous without reason. You arenot going out, I hope?î            

ìNo; I am going to play backgammon with you, if you like,î said theDoctor.            

ìI donít think I do like, if I may speak my mind. I am not fit to be pittedagainst you to-night. Is the teaboard still there, Lucie? I canít see.î            

ìOf course, it has been kept for you.î            

ìThank ye, my dear. The precious child is safe in bed?î            

ìAnd sleeping soundly.î            

ìThatís right; all safe and well! I donít know why anything should beotherwise than safe and well here, thank God; but I have been so put out allday, and I am not as young as I was! My tea, my dear! Thank ye. Now, come andtake your place in the circle, and let us sit quiet, and hear the echoes aboutwhich you have your theory.î            

ìNot a theory; it was a fancy.î            

ìA fancy, then, my wise pet,î said Mr. Lorry, patting her hand. ìThey are verynumerous and very loud, though, are they not? Only hear them!î            

Headlong, mad, and dangerous footsteps to force their way into anybodyís life,footsteps not easily made clean again if once stained red, the footsteps ragingin Saint Antoine afar off, as the little circle sat in the dark Londonwindow.            

Saint Antoine had been, that morning, a vast dusky mass of scarecrows heavingto and fro, with frequent gleams of light above the billowy heads, where steelblades and bayonets shone in the sun. A tremendous roar arose from the throat ofSaint Antoine, and a forest of naked arms struggled in the air like shrivelledbranches of trees in a winter wind: all the fingers convulsively clutching atevery weapon or semblance of a weapon that was thrown up from the depths below,no matter how far off.            

Who gave them out, whence they last came, where they began, through whatagency they crookedly quivered and jerked, scores at a time, over the heads ofthe crowd, like a kind of lightning, no eye in the throng could have told; but,muskets were being distributedóso were cartridges, powder, and ball, bars ofiron and wood, knives, axes, pikes, every weapon that distracted ingenuity coulddiscover or devise. People who could lay hold of nothing else, set themselveswith bleeding hands to force stones and bricks out of their places in walls.Every pulse and heart in Saint Antoine was on high-fever strain and athigh-fever heat. Every living creature there held life as of no account, and wasdemented with a passionate readiness to sacrifice it.            

As a whirlpool of boiling waters has a centre point, so, all this ragingcircled round Defargeís wine-shop, and every human drop in the caldron had atendency to be sucked towards the vortex where Defarge himself, already begrimedwith gunpowder and sweat, issued orders, issued arms, thrust this man back,dragged this man forward, disarmed one to arm another, laboured and strove inthe thickest of the uproar.            

ìKeep near to me, Jacques Three,î cried Defarge; ìand do you, Jacques One andTwo, separate and put yourselves at the head of as many of these patriots as youcan. Where is my wife?î            

ìEh, well! Here you see me!î said madame, composed as ever, but not knittingto-day. Madameís resolute right hand was occupied with an axe, in place of theusual softer implements, and in her girdle were a pistol and a cruelknife.            

ìWhere do you go, my wife?î            

ìI go,î said madame, ìwith you at present. You shall see me at the head ofwomen, by-and-bye.î            

ìCome, then!î cried Defarge, in a resounding voice. ìPatriots and friends, weare ready! The Bastille!î            

With a roar that sounded as if all the breath in France had been shaped intothe detested word, the living sea rose, wave on wave, depth on depth, andoverflowed the city to that point. Alarm-bells ringing, drums beating, the searaging and thundering on its new beach, the attack began.            

Deep ditches, double drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great towers,cannon, muskets, fire and smoke. Through the fire and through the smokeóin thefire and in the smoke, for the sea cast him up against a cannon, and on theinstant he became a cannonieróDefarge of the wine-shop worked like a manfulsoldier, Two fierce hours.            

Deep ditch, single drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great towers,cannon, muskets, fire and smoke. One drawbridge down! ìWork, comrades all, work!Work, Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques One Thousand, Jacques Two Thousand,Jacques Five-and-Twenty Thousand; in the name of all the Angels or theDevilsówhich you preferówork!î Thus Defarge of the wine-shop, still at his gun,which had long grown hot.            

ìTo me, women!î cried madame his wife. ìWhat! We can kill as well as the menwhen the place is taken!î And to her, with a shrill thirsty cry, trooping womenvariously armed, but all armed alike in hunger and revenge.            

Cannon, muskets, fire and smoke; but, still the deep ditch, the singledrawbridge, the massive stone walls, and the eight great towers. Slightdisplacements of the raging sea, made by the falling wounded. Flashing weapons,blazing torches, smoking waggonloads of wet straw, hard work at neighbouringbarricades in all directions, shrieks, volleys, execrations, bravery withoutstint, boom smash and rattle, and the furious sounding of the living sea; but,still the deep ditch, and the single drawbridge, and the massive stone walls,and the eight great towers, and still Defarge of the wine-shop at his gun, growndoubly hot by the service of Four fierce hours.            

A white flag from within the fortress, and a parleyóthis dimly perceptiblethrough the raging storm, nothing audible in itósuddenly the sea roseimmeasurably wider and higher, and swept Defarge of the wine-shop over thelowered drawbridge, past the massive stone outer walls, in among the eight greattowers surrendered!            

So resistless was the force of the ocean bearing him on, that even to draw hisbreath or turn his head was as impracticable as if he had been struggling in thesurf at the South Sea, until he was landed in the outer courtyard of theBastille. There, against an angle of a wall, he made a struggle to look abouthim. Jacques Three was nearly at his side; Madame Defarge, still heading some ofher women, was visible in the inner distance, and her knife was in her hand.Everywhere was tumult, exultation, deafening and maniacal bewilderment,astounding noise, yet furious dumb-show.            

ìThe Prisoners!î            

ìThe Records!î            

ìThe secret cells!î            

ìThe instruments of torture!î            

ìThe Prisoners!î            

Of all these cries, and ten thousand incoherences, ìThe Prisoners!î was thecry most taken up by the sea that rushed in, as if there were an eternity ofpeople, as well as of time and space. When the foremost billows rolled past,bearing the prison officers with them, and threatening them all with instantdeath if any secret nook remained undisclosed, Defarge laid his strong hand onthe breast of one of these menóa man with a grey head, who had a lighted torchin his handóseparated him from the rest, and got him between himself and thewall.            

ìShow me the North Tower!î said Defarge. ìQuick!î            

ìI will faithfully,î replied the man, ìif you will come with me. But there isno one there.î            

ìWhat is the meaning of One Hundred and Five, North Tower?î asked Defarge.ìQuick!î            

ìThe meaning, monsieur?î            

ìDoes it mean a captive, or a place of captivity? Or do you mean that I shallstrike you dead?î            

ìKill him!î croaked Jacques Three, who had come close up.            

ìMonsieur, it is a cell.î            

ìShow it me!î            

ìPass this way, then.î            

Jacques Three, with his usual craving on him, and evidently disappointed bythe dialogue taking a turn that did not seem to promise bloodshed, held byDefargeís arm as he held by the turnkeyís. Their three heads had been closetogether during this brief discourse, and it had been as much as they could doto hear one another, even then: so tremendous was the noise of the living ocean,in its irruption into the Fortress, and its inundation of the courts andpassages and staircases. All around outside, too, it beat the walls with a deep,hoarse roar, from which, occasionally, some partial shouts of tumult broke andleaped into the air like spray.            

Through gloomy vaults where the light of day had never shone, past hideousdoors of dark dens and cages, down cavernous flights of steps, and again upsteep rugged ascents of stone and brick, more like dry waterfalls thanstaircases, Defarge, the turnkey, and Jacques Three, linked hand and arm, wentwith all the speed they could make. Here and there, especially at first, theinundation started on them and swept by; but when they had done descending, andwere winding and climbing up a tower, they were alone. Hemmed in here by themassive thickness of walls and arches, the storm within the fortress and withoutwas only audible to them in a dull, subdued way, as if the noise out of whichthey had come had almost destroyed their sense of hearing.            

The turnkey stopped at a low door, put a key in a clashing lock, swung thedoor slowly open, and said, as they all bent their heads and passed in:            

ìOne hundred and five, North Tower!î            

There was a small, heavily-grated, unglazed window high in the wall, with astone screen before it, so that the sky could be only seen by stooping low andlooking up. There was a small chimney, heavily barred across, a few feet within.There was a heap of old feathery wood-ashes on the hearth. There was a stool,and table, and a straw bed. There were the four blackened walls, and a rustediron ring in one of them.            

ìPass that torch slowly along these walls, that I may see them,î said Defargeto the turnkey.            

The man obeyed, and Defarge followed the light closely with his eyes.            

ìStop! óLook here, Jacques!î            

ìA. M.!î croaked Jacques Three, as he read greedily.            

ìAlexandre Manette,î said Defarge in his ear, following the letters with hisswart forefinger, deeply engrained with gunpowder. ìAnd here he wrote ëa poorphysician.í And it was he, without doubt, who scratched a calendar on thisstone. What is that in your hand? A crowbar? Give it me!î            

He had still the linstock of his gun in his own hand. He made a suddenexchange of the two instruments, and turning on the worm-eaten stool and table,beat them to pieces in a few blows.            

ìHold the light higher!î he said, wrathfully, to the turnkey. ìLook amongthose fragments with care, Jacques. And see! Here is my knife,î throwing it tohim; ìrip open that bed, and search the straw. Hold the light higher,you!î            

With a menacing look at the turnkey he crawled upon the hearth, and, peeringup the chimney, struck and prised at its sides with the crowbar, and worked atthe iron grating across it. In a few minutes, some mortar and dust came droppingdown, which he averted his face to avoid; and in it, and in the old wood-ashes,and in a crevice in the chimney into which his weapon had slipped or wroughtitself, he groped with a cautious touch.            

ìNothing in the wood, and nothing in the straw, Jacques?î            

ìNothing.î            

ìLet us collect them together, in the middle of the cell. So! Light them,you!î            

The turnkey fired the little pile, which blazed high and hot. Stooping againto come out at the low-arched door, they left it burning, and retraced their wayto the courtyard; seeming to recover their sense of hearing as they came down,until they were in the raging flood once more.            

They found it surging and tossing, in quest of Defarge himself. Saint Antoinewas clamorous to have its wine-shop keeper foremost in the guard upon thegovernor who had defended the Bastille and shot the people. Otherwise, thegovernor would not be marched to the Hotel de Ville for judgment. Otherwise, thegovernor would escape, and the peopleís blood (suddenly of some value, aftermany years of worthlessness) be unavenged.            

In the howling universe of passion and contention that seemed to encompassthis grim old officer conspicuous in his grey coat and red decoration, there wasbut one quite steady figure, and that was a womanís. ìSee, there is my husband!îshe cried, pointing him out. ìSee Defarge!î She stood immovable close to thegrim old officer, and remained immovable close to him; remained immovable closeto him through the streets, as Defarge and the rest bore him along; remainedimmovable close to him when he was got near his destination, and began to bestruck at from behind; remained immovable close to him when the long-gatheringrain of stabs and blows fell heavy; was so close to him when he dropped deadunder it, that, suddenly animated, she put her foot upon his neck, and with hercruel knifeólong readyóhewed off his head.            

The hour was come, when Saint Antoine was to execute his horrible idea ofhoisting up men for lamps to show what he could be and do. Saint Antoineís bloodwas up, and the blood of tyranny and domination by the iron hand was downódownon the steps of the Hotel de Ville where the governorís body layódown on thesole of the shoe of Madame Defarge where she had trodden on the body to steadyit for mutilation. ìLower the lamp yonder!î cried Saint Antoine, after glaringround for a new means of death; ìhere is one of his soldiers to be left onguard!î The swinging sentinel was posted, and the sea rushed on.            

The sea of black and threatening waters, and of destructive upheaving of waveagainst wave, whose depths were yet unfathomed and whose forces were yetunknown. The remorseless sea of turbulently swaying shapes, voices of vengeance,and faces hardened in the furnaces of suffering until the touch of pity couldmake no mark on them.            

But, in the ocean of faces where every fierce and furious expression was invivid life, there were two groups of facesóeach seven in numberóso fixedlycontrasting with the rest, that never did sea roll which bore more memorablewrecks with it. Seven faces of prisoners, suddenly released by the storm thathad burst their tomb, were carried high overhead: all scared, all lost, allwondering and amazed, as if the Last Day were come, and those who rejoicedaround them were lost spirits. Other seven faces there were, carried higher,seven dead faces, whose drooping eyelids and half-seen eyes awaited the LastDay. Impassive faces, yet with a suspendedónot an abolishedóexpression on them;faces, rather, in a fearful pause, as having yet to raise the dropped lids ofthe eyes, and bear witness with the bloodless lips, ìTHOU DIDST IT!î            

Seven prisoners released, seven gory heads on pikes, the keys of the accursedfortress of the eight strong towers, some discovered letters and other memorialsof prisoners of old time, long dead of broken hearts,ósuch, and suchólike, theloudly echoing footsteps of Saint Antoine escort through the Paris streets inmid-July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine. Now, Heaven defeat thefancy of Lucie Darnay, and keep these feet far out of her life! For, they areheadlong, mad, and dangerous; and in the years so long after the breaking of thecask at Defargeís wine-shop door, they are not easily purified when once stainedred.            

Haggard Saint Antoine had had only one exultant week, in which to soften hismodicum of hard and bitter bread to such extent as he could, with the relish offraternal embraces and congratulations, when Madame Defarge sat at her counter,as usual, presiding over the customers. Madame Defarge wore no rose in her head,for the great brotherhood of Spies had become, even in one short week, extremelychary of trusting themselves to the saintís mercies. The lamps across hisstreets had a portentously elastic swing with them.            

Madame Defarge, with her arms folded, sat in the morning light and heat,contemplating the wine-shop and the street. In both, there were several knots ofloungers, squalid and miserable, but now with a manifest sense of powerenthroned on their distress. The raggedest nightcap, awry on the wretchedesthead, had this crooked significance in it: ìI know how hard it has grown for me,the wearer of this, to support life in myself; but do you know how easy it hasgrown for me, the wearer of this, to destroy life in you?î Every lean bare arm,that had been without work before, had this work always ready for it now, thatit could strike. The fingers of the knitting women were vicious, with theexperience that they could tear. There was a change in the appearance of SaintAntoine; the image had been hammering into this for hundreds of years, and thelast finishing blows had told mightily on the expression.            

Madame Defarge sat observing it, with such suppressed approval as was to bedesired in the leader of the Saint Antoine women. One of her sisterhood knittedbeside her. The short, rather plump wife of a starved grocer, and the mother oftwo children withal, this lieutenant had already earned the complimentary nameof The Vengeance.            

ìHark!î said The Vengeance. ìListen, then! Who comes?î            

As if a train of powder laid from the outermost bound of Saint Antoine Quarterto the wine-shop door, had been suddenly fired, a fast-spreading murmur camerushing along.            

ìIt is Defarge,î said madame. ìSilence, patriots!î            

Defarge came in breathless, pulled off a red cap he wore, and looked aroundhim! ìListen, everywhere!î said madame again. ìListen to him!î Defarge stood,panting, against a background of eager eyes and open mouths, formed outside thedoor; all those within the wine-shop had sprung to their feet.            

ìSay then, my husband. What is it?î            

ìNews from the other world!î            

ìHow, then?î cried madame, contemptuously. ìThe other world?î            

ìDoes everybody here recall old Foulon, who told the famished people that theymight eat grass, and who died, and went to Hell?î            

ìEverybody!î from all throats.            

ìThe news is of him. He is among us!î            

ìAmong us!î from the universal throat again. ìAnd dead?î            

ìNot dead! He feared us so muchóand with reasonóthat he caused himself to berepresented as dead, and had a grand mock-funeral. But they have found himalive, hiding in the country, and have brought him in. I have seen him but now,on his way to the Hotel de Ville, a prisoner. I have said that he had reason tofear us. Say all! HAD he reason?î            

Wretched old sinner of more than threescore years and ten, if he had neverknown it yet, he would have known it in his heart of hearts if he could haveheard the answering cry.            

A moment of profound silence followed. Defarge and his wife looked steadfastlyat one another. The Vengeance stooped, and the jar of a drum was heard as shemoved it at her feet behind the counter.            

ìPatriots!î said Defarge, in a determined voice, ìare we ready?î            

Instantly Madame Defargeís knife was in her girdle; the drum was beating inthe streets, as if it and a drummer had flown together by magic; and TheVengeance, uttering terrific shrieks, and flinging her arms about her head likeall the forty Furies at once, was tearing from house to house, rousing thewomen.            

The men were terrible, in the bloody-minded anger with which they looked fromwindows, caught up what arms they had, and came pouring down into the streets;but, the women were a sight to chill the boldest. From such householdoccupations as their bare poverty yielded, from their children, from their agedand their sick crouching on the bare ground famished and naked, they ran outwith streaming hair, urging one another, and themselves, to madness with thewildest cries and actions. Villain Foulon taken, my sister! Old Foulon taken, mymother! Miscreant Foulon taken, my daughter! Then, a score of others ran intothe midst of these, beating their breasts, tearing their hair, and screaming,Foulon alive! Foulon who told the starving people they might eat grass! Foulonwho told my old father that he might eat grass, when I had no bread to give him!Foulon who told my baby it might suck grass, when these breasts where dry withwant! O mother of God, this Foulon! O Heaven our suffering! Hear me, my deadbaby and my withered father: I swear on my knees, on these stones, to avenge youon Foulon! Husbands, and brothers, and young men, Give us the blood of Foulon,Give us the head of Foulon, Give us the heart of Foulon, Give us the body andsoul of Foulon, Rend Foulon to pieces, and dig him into the ground, that grassmay grow from him! With these cries, numbers of the women, lashed into blindfrenzy, whirled about, striking and tearing at their own friends until theydropped into a passionate swoon, and were only saved by the men belonging tothem from being trampled under foot.            

Nevertheless, not a moment was lost; not a moment! This Foulon was at theHotel de Ville, and might be loosed. Never, if Saint Antoine knew his ownsufferings, insults, and wrongs! Armed men and women flocked out of the Quarterso fast, and drew even these last dregs after them with such a force of suction,that within a quarter of an hour there was not a human creature in SaintAntoineís bosom but a few old crones and the wailing children.            

No. They were all by that time choking the Hall of Examination where this oldman, ugly and wicked, was, and overflowing into the adjacent open space andstreets. The Defarges, husband and wife, The Vengeance, and Jacques Three, werein the first press, and at no great distance from him in the Hall.            

ìSee!î cried madame, pointing with her knife. ìSee the old villain bound withropes. That was well done to tie a bunch of grass upon his back. Ha, ha! Thatwas well done. Let him eat it now!î Madame put her knife under her arm, andclapped her hands as at a play.            

The people immediately behind Madame Defarge, explaining the cause of hersatisfaction to those behind them, and those again explaining to others, andthose to others, the neighbouring streets resounded with the clapping of hands.Similarly, during two or three hours of drawl, and the winnowing of many bushelsof words, Madame Defargeís frequent expressions of impatience were taken up,with marvellous quickness, at a distance: the more readily, because certain menwho had by some wonderful exercise of agility climbed up the externalarchitecture to look in from the windows, knew Madame Defarge well, and acted asa telegraph between her and the crowd outside the building.            

At length the sun rose so high that it struck a kindly ray as of hope orprotection, directly down upon the old prisonerís head. The favour was too muchto bear; in an instant the barrier of dust and chaff that had stood surprisinglylong, went to the winds, and Saint Antoine had got him!            

It was known directly, to the furthest confines of the crowd. Defarge had butsprung over a railing and a table, and folded the miserable wretch in a deadlyembraceóMadame Defarge had but followed and turned her hand in one of the ropeswith which he was tiedóThe Vengeance and Jacques Three were not yet up withthem, and the men at the windows had not yet swooped into the Hall, like birdsof prey from their high perchesówhen the cry seemed to go up, all over the city,ìBring him out! Bring him to the lamp!î            

Down, and up, and head foremost on the steps of the building; now, on hisknees; now, on his feet; now, on his back; dragged, and struck at, and stifledby the bunches of grass and straw that were thrust into his face by hundreds ofhands; torn, bruised, panting, bleeding, yet always entreating and beseechingfor mercy; now full of vehement agony of action, with a small clear space abouthim as the people drew one another back that they might see; now, a log of deadwood drawn through a forest of legs; he was hauled to the nearest street cornerwhere one of the fatal lamps swung, and there Madame Defarge let him goóas a catmight have done to a mouseóand silently and composedly looked at him while theymade ready, and while he besought her: the women passionately screeching at himall the time, and the men sternly calling out to have him killed with grass inhis mouth. Once, he went aloft, and the rope broke, and they caught himshrieking; twice, he went aloft, and the rope broke, and they caught himshrieking; then, the rope was merciful, and held him, and his head was soon upona pike, with grass enough in the mouth for all Saint Antoine to dance at thesight of.            

Nor was this the end of the dayís bad work, for Saint Antoine so shouted anddanced his angry blood up, that it boiled again, on hearing when the day closedin that the son-in-law of the despatched, another of the peopleís enemies andinsulters, was coming into Paris under a guard five hundred strong, in cavalryalone. Saint Antoine wrote his crimes on flaring sheets of paper, seizedhimówould have torn him out of the breast of an army to bear Foulon companyósethis head and heart on pikes, and carried the three spoils of the day, inWolf-procession through the streets.            

Not before dark night did the men and women come back to the children, wailingand breadless. Then, the miserable bakersí shops were beset by long files ofthem, patiently waiting to buy bad bread; and while they waited with stomachsfaint and empty, they beguiled the time by embracing one another on the triumphsof the day, and achieving them again in gossip. Gradually, these strings ofragged people shortened and frayed away; and then poor lights began to shine inhigh windows, and slender fires were made in the streets, at which neighbourscooked in common, afterwards supping at their doors.            

Scanty and insufficient suppers those, and innocent of meat, as of most othersauce to wretched bread. Yet, human fellowship infused some nourishment into theflinty viands, and struck some sparks of cheerfulness out of them. Fathers andmothers who had had their full share in the worst of the day, played gently withtheir meager children; and lovers, with such a world around them and beforethem, loved and hoped.            

It was almost morning, when Defargeís wine-shop parted with its last knot ofcustomers, and Monsieur Defarge said to madame his wife, in husky tones, whilefastening the door:            

ìAt last it is come, my dear!î            

ìEh well!î returned madame. ìAlmost.î            

Saint Antoine slept, the Defarges slept: even The Vengeance slept with herstarved grocer, and the drum was at rest. The drumís was the only voice in SaintAntoine that blood and hurry had not changed. The Vengeance, as custodian of thedrum, could have wakened him up and had the same speech out of him as before theBastille fell, or old Foulon was seized; not so with the hoarse tones of the menand women in Saint Antoineís bosom.            

There was a change on the village where the fountain fell, and where themender of roads went forth daily to hammer out of the stones on the highway suchmorsels of bread as might serve for patches to hold his poor ignorant soul andhis poor reduced body together. The prison on the crag was not so dominant as ofyore; there were soldiers to guard it, but not many; there were officers toguard the soldiers, but not one of them knew what his men would doóbeyond this:that it would probably not be what he was ordered.            

Far and wide lay a ruined country, yielding nothing but desolation. Everygreen leaf, every blade of grass and blade of grain, was as shrivelled and pooras the miserable people. Everything was bowed down, dejected, oppressed, andbroken. Habitations, fences, domesticated animals, men, women, children, and thesoil that bore themóall worn out.            

Monseigneur (often a most worthy individual gentleman) was a nationalblessing, gave a chivalrous tone to things, was a polite example of luxuriousand shining fife, and a great deal more to equal purpose; nevertheless,Monseigneur as a class had, somehow or other, brought things to this. Strangethat Creation, designed expressly for Monseigneur, should be so soon wrung dryand squeezed out! There must be something short-sighted in the eternalarrangements, surely! Thus it was, however; and the last drop of blood havingbeen extracted from the flints, and the last screw of the rack having beenturned so often that its purchase crumbled, and it now turned and turned withnothing to bite, Monseigneur began to run away from a phenomenon so low andunaccountable.            

But, this was not the change on the village, and on many a village like it.For scores of years gone by, Monseigneur had squeezed it and wrung it, and hadseldom graced it with his presence except for the pleasures of the chaseónow,found in hunting the people; now, found in hunting the beasts, for whosepreservation Monseigneur made edifying spaces of barbarous and barrenwilderness. No. The change consisted in the appearance of strange faces of lowcaste, rather than in the disappearance of the high caste, chiselled, andotherwise beautified and beautifying features of Monseigneur.            

For, in these times, as the mender of roads worked, solitary, in the dust, notoften troubling himself to reflect that dust he was and to dust he must return,being for the most part too much occupied in thinking how little he had forsupper and how much more he would eat if he had itóin these times, as he raisedhis eyes from his lonely labour, and viewed the prospect, he would see somerough figure approaching on foot, the like of which was once a rarity in thoseparts, but was now a frequent presence. As it advanced, the mender of roadswould discern without surprise, that it was a shaggy-haired man, of almostbarbarian aspect, tall, in wooden shoes that were clumsy even to the eyes of amender of roads, grim, rough, swart, steeped in the mud and dust of manyhighways, dank with the marshy moisture of many low grounds, sprinkled with thethorns and leaves and moss of many byways through woods.            

Such a man came upon him, like a ghost, at noon in the July weather, as he saton his heap of stones under a bank, taking such shelter as he could get from ashower of hail.            

The man looked at him, looked at the village in the hollow, at the mill, andat the prison on the crag. When he had identified these objects in whatbenighted mind he had, he said, in a dialect that was just intelligible:            

ìHow goes it, Jacques?î            

ìAll well, Jacques.î            

ìTouch then!î            

They joined hands, and the man sat down on the heap of stones.            

ìNo dinner?î            

ìNothing but supper now,î said the mender of roads, with a hungry face.            

ìIt is the fashion,î growled the man. ìI meet no dinner anywhere.î            

He took out a blackened pipe, filled it, lighted it with flint and steel,pulled at it until it was in a bright glow: then, suddenly held it from him anddropped something into it from between his finger and thumb, that blazed andwent out in a puff of smoke.            

ìTouch then.î It was the turn of the mender of roads to say it this time,after observing these operations. They again joined hands.            

ìTo-night?î said the mender of roads.            

ìTo-night,î said the man, putting the pipe in his mouth.            

ìWhere?î            

ìHere.î            

He and the mender of roads sat on the heap of stones looking silently at oneanother, with the hail driving in between them like a pigmy charge of bayonets,until the sky began to clear over the village.            

ìShow me!î said the traveller then, moving to the brow of the hill.            

ìSee!î returned the mender of roads, with extended finger. ìYou go down here,and straight through the street, and past the fountainóî            

ìTo the Devil with all that!î interrupted the other, rolling his eye over thelandscape. ìI go through no streets and past no fountains.Well?î            

ìWell! About two leagues beyond the summit of that hill above thevillage.î            

ìGood. When do you cease to work?î            

ìAt sunset.î            

ìWill you wake me, before departing? I have walked two nights without resting.Let me finish my pipe, and I shall sleep like a child. Will you wake me?î            

ìSurely.î            

The wayfarer smoked his pipe out, put it in his breast, slipped off his greatwooden shoes, and lay down on his back on the heap of stones. He was fast asleepdirectly.            

As the road-mender plied his dusty labour, and the hail-clouds, rolling away,revealed bright bars and streaks of sky which were responded to by silver gleamsupon the landscape, the little man (who wore a red cap now, in place of his blueone) seemed fascinated by the figure on the heap of stones. His eyes were sooften turned towards it, that he used his tools mechanically, and, one wouldhave said, to very poor account. The bronze face, the shaggy black hair andbeard, the coarse woollen red cap, the rough medley dress of home-spun stuff andhairy skins of beasts, the powerful frame attenuated by spare living, and thesullen and desperate compression of the lips in sleep, inspired the mender ofroads with awe. The traveller had travelled far, and his feet were footsore, andhis ankles chafed and bleeding; his great shoes, stuffed with leaves and grass,had been heavy to drag over the many long leagues, and his clothes were chafedinto holes, as he himself was into sores. Stooping down beside him, theroad-mender tried to get a peep at secret weapons in his breast or where not;but, in vain, for he slept with his arms crossed upon him, and set as resolutelyas his lips. Fortified towns with their stockades, guard-houses, gates,trenches, and drawbridges, seemed to the mender of roads, to be so much air asagainst this figure. And when he lifted his eyes from it to the horizon andlooked around, he saw in his small fancy similar figures, stopped by noobstacle, tending to centres all over France.            

The man slept on, indifferent to showers of hail and intervals of brightness,to sunshine on his face and shadow, to the paltering lumps of dull ice on hisbody and the diamonds into which the sun changed them, until the sun was low inthe west, and the sky was glowing. Then, the mender of roads having got histools together and all things ready to go down into the village, rousedhim.            

ìGood!î said the sleeper, rising on his elbow. ìTwo leagues beyond the summitof the hill?î            

ìAbout.î            

ìAbout. Good!î            

The mender of roads went home, with the dust going on before him according tothe set of the wind, and was soon at the fountain, squeezing himself in amongthe lean kine brought there to drink, and appearing even to whisper to them inhis whispering to all the village. When the village had taken its poor supper,it did not creep to bed, as it usually did, but came out of doors again, andremained there. A curious contagion of whispering was upon it, and also, when itgathered together at the fountain in the dark, another curious contagion oflooking expectantly at the sky in one direction only. Monsieur Gabelle, chieffunctionary of the place, became uneasy; went out on his house-top alone, andlooked in that direction too; glanced down from behind his chimneys at thedarkening faces by the fountain below, and sent word to the sacristan who keptthe keys of the church, that there might be need to ring the tocsinby-and-bye.            

The night deepened. The trees environing the old chateau, keeping its solitarystate apart, moved in a rising wind, as though they threatened the pile ofbuilding massive and dark in the gloom. Up the two terrace flights of steps therain ran wildly, and beat at the great door, like a swift messenger rousingthose within; uneasy rushes of wind went through the hall, among the old spearsand knives, and passed lamenting up the stairs, and shook the curtains of thebed where the last Marquis had slept. East, West, North, and South, through thewoods, four heavy-treading, unkempt figures crushed the high grass and crackedthe branches, striding on cautiously to come together in the courtyard. Fourlights broke out there, and moved away in different directions, and all wasblack again.            

But, not for long. Presently, the chateau began to make itself strangelyvisible by some light of its own, as though it were growing luminous. Then, aflickering streak played behind the architecture of the front, picking outtransparent places, and showing where balustrades, arches, and windows were.Then it soared higher, and grew broader and brighter. Soon, from a score of thegreat windows, flames burst forth, and the stone faces awakened, stared out offire.            

A faint murmur arose about the house from the few people who were left there,and there was a saddling of a horse and riding away. There was spurring andsplashing through the darkness, and bridle was drawn in the space by the villagefountain, and the horse in a foam stood at Monsieur Gabelleís door. ìHelp,Gabelle! Help, every one!î The tocsin rang impatiently, but other help (if thatwere any) there was none. The mender of roads, and two hundred and fiftyparticular friends, stood with folded arms at the fountain, looking at thepillar of fire in the sky. ìIt must be forty feet high,î said they, grimly; andnever moved.            

The rider from the chateau, and the horse in a foam, clattered away throughthe village, and galloped up the stony steep, to the prison on the crag. At thegate, a group of officers were looking at the fire; removed from them, a groupof soldiers. ìHelp, gentlemenóofficers! The chateau is on fire; valuable objectsmay be saved from the flames by timely aid! Help, help!î The officers lookedtowards the soldiers who looked at the fire; gave no orders; and answered, withshrugs and biting of lips, ìIt must burn.î            

As the rider rattled down the hill again and through the street, the villagewas illuminating. The mender of roads, and the two hundred and fifty particularfriends, inspired as one man and woman by the idea of lighting up, had dartedinto their houses, and were putting candles in every dull little pane of glass.The general scarcity of everything, occasioned candles to be borrowed in arather peremptory manner of Monsieur Gabelle; and in a moment of reluctance andhesitation on that functionaryís part, the mender of roads, once so submissiveto authority, had remarked that carriages were good to make bonfires with, andthat post-horses would roast.            

The chateau was left to itself to flame and burn. In the roaring and raging ofthe conflagration, a red-hot wind, driving straight from the infernal regions,seemed to be blowing the edifice away. With the rising and falling of the blaze,the stone faces showed as if they were in torment. When great masses of stoneand timber fell, the face with the two dints in the nose became obscured: anonstruggled out of the smoke again, as if it were the face of the cruel Marquis,burning at the stake and contending with the fire.            

The chateau burned; the nearest trees, laid hold of by the fire, scorched andshrivelled; trees at a distance, fired by the four fierce figures, begirt theblazing edifice with a new forest of smoke. Molten lead and iron boiled in themarble basin of the fountain; the water ran dry; the extinguisher tops of thetowers vanished like ice before the heat, and trickled down into four ruggedwells of flame. Great rents and splits branched out in the solid walls, likecrystallisation; stupefied birds wheeled about and dropped into the furnace;four fierce figures trudged away, East, West, North, and South, along thenight-enshrouded roads, guided by the beacon they had lighted, towards theirnext destination. The illuminated village had seized hold of the tocsin, and,abolishing the lawful ringer, rang for joy.            

Not only that; but the village, light-headed with famine, fire, andbell-ringing, and bethinking itself that Monsieur Gabelle had to do with thecollection of rent and taxesóthough it was but a small instalment of taxes, andno rent at all, that Gabelle had got in those latter daysóbecame impatient foran interview with him, and, surrounding his house, summoned him to come forthfor personal conference. Whereupon, Monsieur Gabelle did heavily bar his door,and retire to hold counsel with himself. The result of that conference was, thatGabelle again withdrew himself to his housetop behind his stack of chimneys;this time resolved, if his door were broken in (he was a small Southern man ofretaliative temperament), to pitch himself head foremost over the parapet, andcrush a man or two below.            

Probably, Monsieur Gabelle passed a long night up there, with the distantchateau for fire and candle, and the beating at his door, combined with thejoy-ringing, for music; not to mention his having an ill-omened lamp slungacross the road before his posting-house gate, which the village showed a livelyinclination to displace in his favour. A trying suspense, to be passing a wholesummer night on the brink of the black ocean, ready to take that plunge into itupon which Monsieur Gabelle had resolved! But, the friendly dawn appearing atlast, and the rush-candles of the village guttering out, the people happilydispersed, and Monsieur Gabelle came down bringing his life with him for thatwhile.            

Within a hundred miles, and in the light of other fires, there were otherfunctionaries less fortunate, that night and other nights, whom the rising sunfound hanging across once-peaceful streets, where they had been born and bred;also, there were other villagers and townspeople less fortunate than the menderof roads and his fellows, upon whom the functionaries and soldiery turned withsuccess, and whom they strung up in their turn. But, the fierce figures weresteadily wending East, West, North, and South, be that as it would; andwhosoever hung, fire burned. The altitude of the gallows that would turn towater and quench it, no functionary, by any stretch of mathematics, was able tocalculate successfully.            

In such risings of fire and risings of seaóthe firm earth shaken by the rushesof an angry ocean which had now no ebb, but was always on the flow, higher andhigher, to the terror and wonder of the beholders on the shoreóthree years oftempest were consumed. Three more birthdays of little Lucie had been woven bythe golden thread into the peaceful tissue of the life of her home.            

Many a night and many a day had its inmates listened to the echoes in thecorner, with hearts that failed them when they heard the thronging feet. For,the footsteps had become to their minds as the footsteps of a people, tumultuousunder a red flag and with their country declared in danger, changed into wildbeasts, by terrible enchantment long persisted in.            

Monseigneur, as a class, had dissociated himself from the phenomenon of hisnot being appreciated: of his being so little wanted in France, as to incurconsiderable danger of receiving his dismissal from it, and this life together.Like the fabled rustic who raised the Devil with infinite pains, and was soterrified at the sight of him that he could ask the Enemy no question, butimmediately fled; so, Monseigneur, after boldly reading the Lordís Prayerbackwards for a great number of years, and performing many other potent spellsfor compelling the Evil One, no sooner beheld him in his terrors than he took tohis noble heels.            

The shining Bullís Eye of the Court was gone, or it would have been the markfor a hurricane of national bullets. It had never been a good eye to seewithóhad long had the mote in it of Luciferís pride, Sardanapalusís luxury, anda moleís blindnessóbut it had dropped out and was gone. The Court, from thatexclusive inner circle to its outermost rotten ring of intrigue, corruption, anddissimulation, was all gone together. Royalty was gone; had been besieged in itsPalace and ìsuspended,î when the last tidings came over.             

The August of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two was come, andMonseigneur was by this time scattered far and wide.            

As was natural, the head-quarters and great gathering-place of Monseigneur, inLondon, was Tellsonís Bank. Spirits are supposed to haunt the places where theirbodies most resorted, and Monseigneur without a guinea haunted the spot wherehis guineas used to be. Moreover, it was the spot to which such Frenchintelligence as was most to be relied upon, came quickest. Again: Tellsonís wasa munificent house, and extended great liberality to old customers who hadfallen from their high estate. Again: those nobles who had seen the coming stormin time, and anticipating plunder or confiscation, had made providentremittances to Tellsonís, were always to be heard of there by their needybrethren. To which it must be added that every new-comer from France reportedhimself and his tidings at Tellsonís, almost as a matter of course. For suchvariety of reasons, Tellsonís was at that time, as to French intelligence, akind of High Exchange; and this was so well known to the public, and theinquiries made there were in consequence so numerous, that Tellsonís sometimeswrote the latest news out in a line or so and posted it in the Bank windows, forall who ran through Temple Bar to read.            

On a steaming, misty afternoon, Mr. Lorry sat at his desk, and Charles Darnaystood leaning on it, talking with him in a low voice. The penitential den onceset apart for interviews with the House, was now the news-Exchange, and wasfilled to overflowing. It was within half an hour or so of the time ofclosing.            

ìBut, although you are the youngest man that ever lived,î said Charles Darnay,rather hesitating, ìI must still suggest to youóî            

ìI understand. That I am too old?î said Mr. Lorry.            

ìUnsettled weather, a long journey, uncertain means of travelling, adisorganised country, a city that may not be even safe for you.î             

ìMy dear Charles,î said Mr. Lorry, with cheerful confidence, ìyou touch someof the reasons for my going: not for my staying away. It is safe enough for me;nobody will care to interfere with an old fellow of hard upon fourscore whenthere are so many people there much better worth interfering with. As to itsbeing a disorganised city, if it were not a disorganised city there would be nooccasion to send somebody from our House here to our House there, who knows thecity and the business, of old, and is in Tellsonís confidence. As to theuncertain travelling, the long journey, and the winter weather, if I were notprepared to submit myself to a few inconveniences for the sake of Tellsonís,after all these years, who ought to be?î            

ìI wish I were going myself,î said Charles Darnay, somewhat restlessly, andlike one thinking aloud.             

ìIndeed! You are a pretty fellow to object and advise!î exclaimed Mr. Lorry.ìYou wish you were going yourself? And you a Frenchman born? You are a wisecounsellor.î            

ìMy dear Mr. Lorry, it is because I am a Frenchman born, that the thought(which I did not mean to utter here, however) has passed through my mind often.One cannot help thinking, having had some sympathy for the miserable people, andhaving abandoned something to them,î he spoke here in his former thoughtfulmanner, ìthat one might be listened to, and might have the power to persuade tosome restraint. Only last night, after you had left us, when I was talking toLucieóî            

ìWhen you were talking to Lucie,î Mr. Lorry repeated. ìYes. I wonder you arenot ashamed to mention the name of Lucie! Wishing you were going to France atthis time of day!î            

ìHowever, I am not going,î said Charles Darnay, with a smile. ìIt is more tothe purpose that you say you are.î            

ìAnd I am, in plain reality. The truth is, my dear Charles,î Mr. Lorry glancedat the distant House, and lowered his voice, ìyou can have no conception of thedifficulty with which our business is transacted, and of the peril in which ourbooks and papers over yonder are involved. The Lord above knows what thecompromising consequences would be to numbers of people, if some of ourdocuments were seized or destroyed; and they might be, at any time, you know,for who can say that Paris is not set afire to-day, or sacked to-morrow! Now, ajudicious selection from these with the least possible delay, and the burying ofthem, or otherwise getting of them out of harmís way, is within the power(without loss of precious time) of scarcely any one but myself, if any one. Andshall I hang back, when Tellsonís knows this and says thisóTellsonís, whosebread I have eaten these sixty yearsóbecause I am a little stiff about thejoints? Why, I am a boy, sir, to half a dozen old codgers here!î            

ìHow I admire the gallantry of your youthful spirit, Mr. Lorry.î            

ìTut! Nonsense, sir!óAnd, my dear Charles,î said Mr. Lorry, glancing at theHouse again, ìyou are to remember, that getting things out of Paris at thispresent time, no matter what things, is next to an impossibility. Papers andprecious matters were this very day brought to us here (I speak in strictconfidence; it is not business-like to whisper it, even to you), by thestrangest bearers you can imagine, every one of whom had his head hanging on bya single hair as he passed the Barriers. At another time, our parcels would comeand go, as easily as in business-like Old England; but now, everything isstopped.î            

ìAnd do you really go to-night?î            

ìI really go to-night, for the case has become too pressing to admit ofdelay.î            

ìAnd do you take no one with you?î            

ìAll sorts of people have been proposed to me, but I will have nothing to sayto any of them. I intend to take Jerry. Jerry has been my bodyguard on Sundaynights for a long time past and I am used to him. Nobody will suspect Jerry ofbeing anything but an English bull-dog, or of having any design in his head butto fly at anybody who touches his master.î            

ìI must say again that I heartily admire your gallantry andyouthfulness.î            

ìI must say again, nonsense, nonsense! When I have executed this littlecommission, I shall, perhaps, accept Tellsonís proposal to retire and live at myease. Time enough, then, to think about growing old.î            

This dialogue had taken place at Mr. Lorryís usual desk, with Monseigneurswarming within a yard or two of it, boastful of what he would do to avengehimself on the rascal-people before long. It was too much the way of Monseigneurunder his reverses as a refugee, and it was much too much the way of nativeBritish orthodoxy, to talk of this terrible Revolution as if it were the onlyharvest ever known under the skies that had not been sownóas if nothing had everbeen done, or omitted to be done, that had led to itóas if observers of thewretched millions in France, and of the misused and perverted resources thatshould have made them prosperous, had not seen it inevitably coming, yearsbefore, and had not in plain words recorded what they saw. Such vapouring,combined with the extravagant plots of Monseigneur for the restoration of astate of things that had utterly exhausted itself, and worn out Heaven and earthas well as itself, was hard to be endured without some remonstrance by any saneman who knew the truth. And it was such vapouring all about his ears, like atroublesome confusion of blood in his own head, added to a latent uneasiness inhis mind, which had already made Charles Darnay restless, and which still kepthim so.            

Among the talkers, was Stryver, of the Kingís Bench Bar, far on his way tostate promotion, and, therefore, loud on the theme: broaching to Monseigneur,his devices for blowing the people up and exterminating them from the face ofthe earth, and doing without them: and for accomplishing many similar objectsakin in their nature to the abolition of eagles by sprinkling salt on the tailsof the race. Him, Darnay heard with a particular feeling of objection; andDarnay stood divided between going away that he might hear no more, andremaining to interpose his word, when the thing that was to be, went on to shapeitself out.            

The House approached Mr. Lorry, and laying a soiled and unopened letter beforehim, asked if he had yet discovered any traces of the person to whom it wasaddressed? The House laid the letter down so close to Darnay that he saw thedirectionóthe more quickly because it was his own right name. The address,turned into English, ran:            

ìVery pressing. To Monsieur heretofore the Marquis St. Evremonde, of France.Confided to the cares of Messrs. Tellson and Co., Bankers, London,England.î            

On the marriage morning, Doctor Manette had made it his one urgent and expressrequest to Charles Darnay, that the secret of this name should beóunless he, theDoctor, dissolved the obligationókept inviolate between them. Nobody else knewit to be his name; his own wife had no suspicion of the fact; Mr. Lorry couldhave none.            

ìNo,î said Mr. Lorry, in reply to the House; ìI have referred it, I think, toeverybody now here, and no one can tell me where this gentleman is to befound.î            

The hands of the clock verging upon the hour of closing the Bank, there was ageneral set of the current of talkers past Mr. Lorryís desk. He held the letterout inquiringly; and Monseigneur looked at it, in the person of this plottingand indignant refugee; and Monseigneur looked at it in the person of thatplotting and indignant refugee; and This, That, and The Other, all had somethingdisparaging to say, in French or in English, concerning the Marquis who was notto be found.             

ìNephew, I believeóbut in any case degenerate successoróof the polishedMarquis who was murdered,î said one. ìHappy to say, I never knew him.î            

ìA craven who abandoned his post,î said anotheróthis Monseigneur had been gotout of Paris, legs uppermost and half suffocated, in a load of hayóîsome yearsago.î            

ìInfected with the new doctrines,î said a third, eyeing the direction throughhis glass in passing; ìset himself in opposition to the last Marquis, abandonedthe estates when he inherited them, and left them to the ruffian herd. They willrecompense him now, I hope, as he deserves.î            

ìHey?î cried the blatant Stryver. ìDid he though? Is that the sort of fellow?Let us look at his infamous name. Dón the fellow!î            

Darnay, unable to restrain himself any longer, touched Mr. Stryver on theshoulder, and said:            

ìI know the fellow.î            

ìDo you, by Jupiter?î said Stryver. ìI am sorry for it.î            

ìWhy?î            

ìWhy, Mr. Darnay? Díye hear what he did? Donít ask, why, in thesetimes.î            

ìBut I do ask why?î            

ìThen I tell you again, Mr. Darnay, I am sorry for it. I am sorry to hear youputting any such extraordinary questions. Here is a fellow, who, infected by themost pestilent and blasphemous code of devilry that ever was known, abandonedhis property to the vilest scum of the earth that ever did murder by wholesale,and you ask me why I am sorry that a man who instructs youth knows him? Well,but Iíll answer you. I am sorry because I believe there is contamination in sucha scoundrel. Thatís why.î            

Mindful of the secret, Darnay with great difficulty checked himself, and said:ìYou may not understand the gentleman.î            

ìI understand how to put YOU in a corner, Mr. Darnay,î said Bully Stryver,ìand Iíll do it. If this fellow is a gentleman, I DON'T understand him. You maytell him so, with my compliments. You may also tell him, from me, that afterabandoning his worldly goods and position to this butcherly mob, I wonder he isnot at the head of them. But, no, gentlemen,î said Stryver, looking all round,and snapping his fingers, ìI know something of human nature, and I tell you thatyouíll never find a fellow like this fellow, trusting himself to the mercies ofsuch precious PROTEGES. No, gentlemen; heíll always show ëem a clean pair ofheels very early in the scuffle, and sneak away.î            

With those words, and a final snap of his fingers, Mr. Stryver shoulderedhimself into Fleet-street, amidst the general approbation of his hearers. Mr.Lorry and Charles Darnay were left alone at the desk, in the general departurefrom the Bank.             

ìWill you take charge of the letter?î said Mr. Lorry. ìYou know where todeliver it?î            

ìI do.î            

ìWill you undertake to explain, that we suppose it to have been addressedhere, on the chance of our knowing where to forward it, and that it has beenhere some time?î            

ìI will do so. Do you start for Paris from here?î            

ìFrom here, at eight.î            

ìI will come back, to see you off.î            

Very ill at ease with himself, and with Stryver and most other men, Darnaymade the best of his way into the quiet of the Temple, opened the letter, andread it. These were its contents:            

ìPrison of the Abbaye, Paris.            

ìJune 21, 1792.             

ìMONSIEUR HERETOFORE THE MARQUIS.            

ìAfter having long been in danger of my life at the hands of the village, Ihave been seized, with great violence and indignity, and brought a long journeyon foot to Paris. On the road I have suffered a great deal. Nor is that all; myhouse has been destroyedórazed to the ground.            

ìThe crime for which I am imprisoned, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, and forwhich I shall be summoned before the tribunal, and shall lose my life (withoutyour so generous help), is, they tell me, treason against the majesty of thepeople, in that I have acted against them for an emigrant. It is in vain Irepresent that I have acted for them, and not against, according to yourcommands. It is in vain I represent that, before the sequestration of emigrantproperty, I had remitted the imposts they had ceased to pay; that I hadcollected no rent; that I had had recourse to no process. The only response is,that I have acted for an emigrant, and where is that emigrant?            

ìAh! most gracious Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, where is that emigrant? Icry in my sleep where is he? I demand of Heaven, will he not come to deliver me?No answer. Ah Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, I send my desolate cry across thesea, hoping it may perhaps reach your ears through the great bank of Tilsonknown at Paris!             

ìFor the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the honour of yournoble name, I supplicate you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, to succour andrelease me. My fault is, that I have been true to you. Oh Monsieur heretoforethe Marquis, I pray you be you true to me!             

ìFrom this prison here of horror, whence I every hour tend nearer and nearerto destruction, I send you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, the assurance of mydolorous and unhappy service.             

ìYour afflicted,            

ìGabelle.î            

The latent uneasiness in Darnayís mind was roused to vigourous life by thisletter. The peril of an old servant and a good one, whose only crime wasfidelity to himself and his family, stared him so reproachfully in the face,that, as he walked to and fro in the Temple considering what to do, he almosthid his face from the passersby.             

He knew very well, that in his horror of the deed which had culminated the baddeeds and bad reputation of the old family house, in his resentful suspicions ofhis uncle, and in the aversion with which his conscience regarded the crumblingfabric that he was supposed to uphold, he had acted imperfectly. He knew verywell, that in his love for Lucie, his renunciation of his social place, thoughby no means new to his own mind, had been hurried and incomplete. He knew thathe ought to have systematically worked it out and supervised it, and that he hadmeant to do it, and that it had never been done.            

The happiness of his own chosen English home, the necessity of being alwaysactively employed, the swift changes and troubles of the time which had followedon one another so fast, that the events of this week annihilated the immatureplans of last week, and the events of the week following made all new again; heknew very well, that to the force of these circumstances he had yielded:ónotwithout disquiet, but still without continuous and accumulating resistance. Thathe had watched the times for a time of action, and that they had shifted andstruggled until the time had gone by, and the nobility were trooping from Franceby every highway and byway, and their property was in course of confiscation anddestruction, and their very names were blotting out, was as well known tohimself as it could be to any new authority in France that might impeach him forit.            

But, he had oppressed no man, he had imprisoned no man; he was so far fromhaving harshly exacted payment of his dues, that he had relinquished them of hisown will, thrown himself on a world with no favour in it, won his own privateplace there, and earned his own bread. Monsieur Gabelle had held theimpoverished and involved estate on written instructions, to spare the people,to give them what little there was to giveósuch fuel as the heavy creditorswould let them have in the winter, and such produce as could be saved from thesame grip in the summeróand no doubt he had put the fact in plea and proof, forhis own safety, so that it could not but appear now.            

This favoured the desperate resolution Charles Darnay had begun to make, thathe would go to Paris.            

Yes. Like the mariner in the old story, the winds and streams had driven himwithin the influence of the Loadstone Rock, and it was drawing him to itself,and he must go. Everything that arose before his mind drifted him on, faster andfaster, more and more steadily, to the terrible attraction. His latentuneasiness had been, that bad aims were being worked out in his own unhappy landby bad instruments, and that he who could not fail to know that he was betterthan they, was not there, trying to do something to stay bloodshed, and assertthe claims of mercy and humanity. With this uneasiness half stifled, and halfreproaching him, he had been brought to the pointed comparison of himself withthe brave old gentleman in whom duty was so strong; upon that comparison(injurious to himself) had instantly followed the sneers of Monseigneur, whichhad stung him bitterly, and those of Stryver, which above all were coarse andgalling, for old reasons. Upon those, had followed Gabelleís letter: the appealof an innocent prisoner, in danger of death, to his justice, honour, and goodname.            

His resolution was made. He must go to Paris.            

Yes. The Loadstone Rock was drawing him, and he must sail on, until he struck.He knew of no rock; he saw hardly any danger. The intention with which he haddone what he had done, even although he had left it incomplete, presented itbefore him in an aspect that would be gratefully acknowledged in France on hispresenting himself to assert it. Then, that glorious vision of doing good, whichis so often the sanguine mirage of so many good minds, arose before him, and heeven saw himself in the illusion with some influence to guide this ragingRevolution that was running so fearfully wild.            

As he walked to and fro with his resolution made, he considered that neitherLucie nor her father must know of it until he was gone. Lucie should be sparedthe pain of separation; and her father, always reluctant to turn his thoughtstowards the dangerous ground of old, should come to the knowledge of the step,as a step taken, and not in the balance of suspense and doubt. How much of theincompleteness of his situation was referable to her father, through the painfulanxiety to avoid reviving old associations of France in his mind, he did notdiscuss with himself. But, that circumstance too, had had its influence in hiscourse.            

He walked to and fro, with thoughts very busy, until it was time to return toTellsonís and take leave of Mr. Lorry. As soon as he arrived in Paris he wouldpresent himself to this old friend, but he must say nothing of his intentionnow.            

A carriage with post-horses was ready at the Bank door, and Jerry was bootedand equipped.            

ìI have delivered that letter,î said Charles Darnay to Mr. Lorry. ìI would notconsent to your being charged with any written answer, but perhaps you will takea verbal one?î            

ìThat I will, and readily,î said Mr. Lorry, ìif it is not dangerous.î            

ìNot at all. Though it is to a prisoner in the Abbaye.î            

ìWhat is his name?î said Mr. Lorry, with his open pocket-book in hishand.            

ìGabelle.î            

ìGabelle. And what is the message to the unfortunate Gabelle inprison?î            

ìSimply, ëthat he has received the letter, and will come.íì            

ìAny time mentioned?î            

ìHe will start upon his journey to-morrow night.î            

ìAny person mentioned?î            

ìNo.î            

He helped Mr. Lorry to wrap himself in a number of coats and cloaks, and wentout with him from the warm atmosphere of the old Bank, into the misty air ofFleet-street. ìMy love to Lucie, and to little Lucie,î said Mr. Lorry atparting, ìand take precious care of them till I come back.î Charles Darnay shookhis head and doubtfully smiled, as the carriage rolled away.            

That nightóit was the fourteenth of Augustóhe sat up late, and wrote twofervent letters; one was to Lucie, explaining the strong obligation he was underto go to Paris, and showing her, at length, the reasons that he had, for feelingconfident that he could become involved in no personal danger there; the otherwas to the Doctor, confiding Lucie and their dear child to his care, anddwelling on the same topics with the strongest assurances. To both, he wrotethat he would despatch letters in proof of his safety, immediately after hisarrival.            

It was a hard day, that day of being among them, with the first reservation oftheir joint lives on his mind. It was a hard matter to preserve the innocentdeceit of which they were profoundly unsuspicious. But, an affectionate glanceat his wife, so happy and busy, made him resolute not to tell her what impended(he had been half moved to do it, so strange it was to him to act in anythingwithout her quiet aid), and the day passed quickly. Early in the evening heembraced her, and her scarcely less dear namesake, pretending that he wouldreturn by-and-bye (an imaginary engagement took him out, and he had secreted avalise of clothes ready), and so he emerged into the heavy mist of the heavystreets, with a heavier heart.            

The unseen force was drawing him fast to itself, now, and all the tides andwinds were setting straight and strong towards it. He left his two letters witha trusty porter, to be delivered half an hour before midnight, and no sooner;took horse for Dover; and began his journey. ìFor the love of Heaven, ofjustice, of generosity, of the honour of your noble name!î was the poorprisonerís cry with which he strengthened his sinking heart, as he left all thatwas dear on earth behind him, and floated away for the Loadstone Rock.            

The end of the second book.            

The traveller fared slowly on his way, who fared towards Paris from England inthe autumn of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two. More thanenough of bad roads, bad equipages, and bad horses, he would have encountered todelay him, though the fallen and unfortunate King of France had been upon histhrone in all his glory; but, the changed times were fraught with otherobstacles than these. Every town-gate and village taxing-house had its band ofcitizen-patriots, with their national muskets in a most explosive state ofreadiness, who stopped all comers and goers, cross-questioned them, inspectedtheir papers, looked for their names in lists of their own, turned them back, orsent them on, or stopped them and laid them in hold, as their capriciousjudgment or fancy deemed best for the dawning Republic One and Indivisible, ofLiberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death.            

A very few French leagues of his journey were accomplished, when CharlesDarnay began to perceive that for him along these country roads there was nohope of return until he should have been declared a good citizen at Paris.Whatever might befall now, he must on to his journeyís end. Not a mean villageclosed upon him, not a common barrier dropped across the road behind him, but heknew it to be another iron door in the series that was barred between him andEngland. The universal watchfulness so encompassed him, that if he had beentaken in a net, or were being forwarded to his destination in a cage, he couldnot have felt his freedom more completely gone.            

This universal watchfulness not only stopped him on the highway twenty timesin a stage, but retarded his progress twenty times in a day, by riding after himand taking him back, riding before him and stopping him by anticipation, ridingwith him and keeping him in charge. He had been days upon his journey in Francealone, when he went to bed tired out, in a little town on the high road, still along way from Paris.            

Nothing but the production of the afflicted Gabelleís letter from his prisonof the Abbaye would have got him on so far. His difficulty at the guard-house inthis small place had been such, that he felt his journey to have come to acrisis. And he was, therefore, as little surprised as a man could be, to findhimself awakened at the small inn to which he had been remitted until morning,in the middle of the night.            

Awakened by a timid local functionary and three armed patriots in rough redcaps and with pipes in their mouths, who sat down on the bed.            

ìEmigrant,î said the functionary, ìI am going to send you on to Paris, underan escort.î             

ìCitizen, I desire nothing more than to get to Paris, though I could dispensewith the escort.î            

ìSilence!î growled a red-cap, striking at the coverlet with the butt-end ofhis musket. ìPeace, aristocrat!î            

ìIt is as the good patriot says,î observed the timid functionary. ìYou are anaristocrat, and must have an escortóand must pay for it.î            

ìI have no choice,î said Charles Darnay.            

ìChoice! Listen to him!î cried the same scowling red-cap. ìAs if it was not afavour to be protected from the lamp-iron!î            

ìIt is always as the good patriot says,î observed the functionary. ìRise anddress yourself, emigrant.î            

Darnay complied, and was taken back to the guard-house, where other patriotsin rough red caps were smoking, drinking, and sleeping, by a watch-fire. Here hepaid a heavy price for his escort, and hence he started with it on the wet, wetroads at three oíclock in the morning.            

The escort were two mounted patriots in red caps and tri-coloured cockades,armed with national muskets and sabres, who rode one on either side ofhim.            

The escorted governed his own horse, but a loose line was attached to hisbridle, the end of which one of the patriots kept girded round his wrist. Inthis state they set forth with the sharp rain driving in their faces: clatteringat a heavy dragoon trot over the uneven town pavement, and out upon themire-deep roads. In this state they traversed without change, except of horsesand pace, all the mire-deep leagues that lay between them and thecapital.            

They travelled in the night, halting an hour or two after daybreak, and lyingby until the twilight fell. The escort were so wretchedly clothed, that theytwisted straw round their bare legs, and thatched their ragged shoulders to keepthe wet off. Apart from the personal discomfort of being so attended, and apartfrom such considerations of present danger as arose from one of the patriotsbeing chronically drunk, and carrying his musket very recklessly, Charles Darnaydid not allow the restraint that was laid upon him to awaken any serious fearsin his breast; for, he reasoned with himself that it could have no reference tothe merits of an individual case that was not yet stated, and ofrepresentations, confirmable by the prisoner in the Abbaye, that were not yetmade.            

But when they came to the town of Beauvaisówhich they did at eventide, whenthe streets were filled with peopleóhe could not conceal from himself that theaspect of affairs was very alarming. An ominous crowd gathered to see himdismount of the posting-yard, and many voices called out loudly, ìDown with theemigrant!î            

He stopped in the act of swinging himself out of his saddle, and, resuming itas his safest place, said:            

ìEmigrant, my friends! Do you not see me here, in France, of my ownwill?î            

ìYou are a cursed emigrant,î cried a farrier, making at him in a furiousmanner through the press, hammer in hand; ìand you are a cursedaristocrat!î            

The postmaster interposed himself between this man and the riderís bridle (atwhich he was evidently making), and soothingly said, ìLet him be; let him be! Hewill be judged at Paris.î            

ìJudged!î repeated the farrier, swinging his hammer. ìAy! and condemned as atraitor.î At this the crowd roared approval.            

Checking the postmaster, who was for turning his horseís head to the yard (thedrunken patriot sat composedly in his saddle looking on, with the line round hiswrist), Darnay said, as soon as he could make his voice heard:            

ìFriends, you deceive yourselves, or you are deceived. I am not atraitor.î            

ìHe lies!î cried the smith. ìHe is a traitor since the decree. His life isforfeit to the people. His cursed life is not his own!î            

At the instant when Darnay saw a rush in the eyes of the crowd, which anotherinstant would have brought upon him, the postmaster turned his horse into theyard, the escort rode in close upon his horseís flanks, and the postmaster shutand barred the crazy double gates. The farrier struck a blow upon them with hishammer, and the crowd groaned; but, no more was done.            

ìWhat is this decree that the smith spoke of?î Darnay asked the postmaster,when he had thanked him, and stood beside him in the yard.            

ìTruly, a decree for selling the property of emigrants.î            

ìWhen passed?î            

ìOn the fourteenth.î            

ìThe day I left England!î            

ìEverybody says it is but one of several, and that there will be othersóifthere are not alreadyóbanishing all emigrants, and condemning all to death whoreturn. That is what he meant when he said your life was not your own.î            

ìBut there are no such decrees yet?î            

ìWhat do I know!î said the postmaster, shrugging his shoulders; ìthere may be,or there will be. It is all the same. What would you have?î            

They rested on some straw in a loft until the middle of the night, and thenrode forward again when all the town was asleep. Among the many wild changesobservable on familiar things which made this wild ride unreal, not the leastwas the seeming rarity of sleep. After long and lonely spurring over drearyroads, they would come to a cluster of poor cottages, not steeped in darkness,but all glittering with lights, and would find the people, in a ghostly mannerin the dead of the night, circling hand in hand round a shrivelled tree ofLiberty, or all drawn up together singing a Liberty song. Happily, however,there was sleep in Beauvais that night to help them out of it and they passed ononce more into solitude and loneliness: jingling through the untimely cold andwet, among impoverished fields that had yielded no fruits of the earth thatyear, diversified by the blackened remains of burnt houses, and by the suddenemergence from ambuscade, and sharp reining up across their way, of patriotpatrols on the watch on all the roads.            

Daylight at last found them before the wall of Paris. The barrier was closedand strongly guarded when they rode up to it.            

ìWhere are the papers of this prisoner?î demanded a resolute-looking man inauthority, who was summoned out by the guard.            

Naturally struck by the disagreeable word, Charles Darnay requested thespeaker to take notice that he was a free traveller and French citizen, incharge of an escort which the disturbed state of the country had imposed uponhim, and which he had paid for.            

ìWhere,î repeated the same personage, without taking any heed of him whatever,ìare the papers of this prisoner?î            

The drunken patriot had them in his cap, and produced them. Casting his eyesover Gabelleís letter, the same personage in authority showed some disorder andsurprise, and looked at Darnay with a close attention.            

He left escort and escorted without saying a word, however, and went into theguard-room; meanwhile, they sat upon their horses outside the gate. Lookingabout him while in this state of suspense, Charles Darnay observed that the gatewas held by a mixed guard of soldiers and patriots, the latter far outnumberingthe former; and that while ingress into the city for peasantsí carts bringing insupplies, and for similar traffic and traffickers, was easy enough, egress, evenfor the homeliest people, was very difficult. A numerous medley of men andwomen, not to mention beasts and vehicles of various sorts, was waiting to issueforth; but, the previous identification was so strict, that they filteredthrough the barrier very slowly. Some of these people knew their turn forexamination to be so far off, that they lay down on the ground to sleep orsmoke, while others talked together, or loitered about. The red cap andtri-colour cockade were universal, both among men and women.            

When he had sat in his saddle some half-hour, taking note of these things,Darnay found himself confronted by the same man in authority, who directed theguard to open the barrier. Then he delivered to the escort, drunk and sober, areceipt for the escorted, and requested him to dismount. He did so, and the twopatriots, leading his tired horse, turned and rode away without entering thecity.            

He accompanied his conductor into a guard-room, smelling of common wine andtobacco, where certain soldiers and patriots, asleep and awake, drunk and sober,and in various neutral states between sleeping and waking, drunkenness andsobriety, were standing and lying about. The light in the guard-house, halfderived from the waning oil-lamps of the night, and half from the overcast day,was in a correspondingly uncertain condition. Some registers were lying open ona desk, and an officer of a coarse, dark aspect, presided over these.            

ìCitizen Defarge,î said he to Darnayís conductor, as he took a slip of paperto write on. ìIs this the emigrant Evremonde?î            

ìThis is the man.î            

ìYour age, Evremonde?î            

ìThirty-seven.î            

ìMarried, Evremonde?î            

ìYes.î            

ìWhere married?î            

ìIn England.î            

ìWithout doubt. Where is your wife, Evremonde?î            

ìIn England.î            

ìWithout doubt. You are consigned, Evremonde, to the prison of LaForce.î            

ìJust Heaven!î exclaimed Darnay. ìUnder what law, and for whatoffence?î            

The officer looked up from his slip of paper for a moment.            

ìWe have new laws, Evremonde, and new offences, since you were here.î He saidit with a hard smile, and went on writing.            

ìI entreat you to observe that I have come here voluntarily, in response tothat written appeal of a fellow-countryman which lies before you. I demand nomore than the opportunity to do so without delay. Is not that my right?î            

ìEmigrants have no rights, Evremonde,î was the stolid reply. The officer wroteuntil he had finished, read over to himself what he had written, sanded it, andhanded it to Defarge, with the words ìIn secret.î            

Defarge motioned with the paper to the prisoner that he must accompany him.The prisoner obeyed, and a guard of two armed patriots attended them.            

ìIs it you,î said Defarge, in a low voice, as they went down the guardhousesteps and turned into Paris, ìwho married the daughter of Doctor Manette, once aprisoner in the Bastille that is no more?î            

ìYes,î replied Darnay, looking at him with surprise.            

ìMy name is Defarge, and I keep a wine-shop in the Quarter Saint Antoine.Possibly you have heard of me.î            

ìMy wife came to your house to reclaim her father? Yes!î            

The word ìwifeî seemed to serve as a gloomy reminder to Defarge, to say withsudden impatience, ìIn the name of that sharp female newly-born, and called LaGuillotine, why did you come to France?î            

ìYou heard me say why, a minute ago. Do you not believe it is thetruth?î            

ìA bad truth for you,î said Defarge, speaking with knitted brows, and lookingstraight before him.            

ìIndeed I am lost here. All here is so unprecedented, so changed, so suddenand unfair, that I am absolutely lost. Will you render me a little help?î            

ìNone.î Defarge spoke, always looking straight before him.            

ìWill you answer me a single question?î            

ìPerhaps. According to its nature. You can say what it is.î            

ìIn this prison that I am going to so unjustly, shall I have some freecommunication with the world outside?î            

ìYou will see.î            

ìI am not to be buried there, prejudged, and without any means of presentingmy case?î            

ìYou will see. But, what then? Other people have been similarly buried inworse prisons, before now.î            

ìBut never by me, Citizen Defarge.î            

Defarge glanced darkly at him for answer, and walked on in a steady and setsilence. The deeper he sank into this silence, the fainter hope there wasóor soDarnay thoughtóof his softening in any slight degree. He, therefore, made hasteto say:            

ìIt is of the utmost importance to me (you know, Citizen, even better than I,of how much importance), that I should be able to communicate to Mr. Lorry ofTellsonís Bank, an English gentleman who is now in Paris, the simple fact,without comment, that I have been thrown into the prison of La Force. Will youcause that to be done for me?î            

ìI will do,î Defarge doggedly rejoined, ìnothing for you. My duty is to mycountry and the People. I am the sworn servant of both, against you. I will donothing for you.î            

Charles Darnay felt it hopeless to entreat him further, and his pride wastouched besides. As they walked on in silence, he could not but see how used thepeople were to the spectacle of prisoners passing along the streets. The verychildren scarcely noticed him. A few passers turned their heads, and a few shooktheir fingers at him as an aristocrat; otherwise, that a man in good clothesshould be going to prison, was no more remarkable than that a labourer inworking clothes should be going to work. In one narrow, dark, and dirty streetthrough which they passed, an excited orator, mounted on a stool, was addressingan excited audience on the crimes against the people, of the king and the royalfamily. The few words that he caught from this manís lips, first made it knownto Charles Darnay that the king was in prison, and that the foreign ambassadorshad one and all left Paris. On the road (except at Beauvais) he had heardabsolutely nothing. The escort and the universal watchfulness had completelyisolated him.            

That he had fallen among far greater dangers than those which had developedthemselves when he left England, he of course knew now. That perils hadthickened about him fast, and might thicken faster and faster yet, he of courseknew now. He could not but admit to himself that he might not have made thisjourney, if he could have foreseen the events of a few days. And yet hismisgivings were not so dark as, imagined by the light of this later time, theywould appear. Troubled as the future was, it was the unknown future, and in itsobscurity there was ignorant hope. The horrible massacre, days and nights long,which, within a few rounds of the clock, was to set a great mark of blood uponthe blessed garnering time of harvest, was as far out of his knowledge as if ithad been a hundred thousand years away. The ìsharp female newly-born, and calledLa Guillotine,î was hardly known to him, or to the generality of people, byname. The frightful deeds that were to be soon done, were probably unimagined atthat time in the brains of the doers. How could they have a place in the shadowyconceptions of a gentle mind?            

Of unjust treatment in detention and hardship, and in cruel separation fromhis wife and child, he foreshadowed the likelihood, or the certainty; but,beyond this, he dreaded nothing distinctly. With this on his mind, which wasenough to carry into a dreary prison courtyard, he arrived at the prison of LaForce.            

A man with a bloated face opened the strong wicket, to whom Defarge presentedìThe Emigrant Evremonde.î            

ìWhat the Devil! How many more of them!î exclaimed the man with the bloatedface.            

Defarge took his receipt without noticing the exclamation, and withdrew, withhis two fellow-patriots.            

ìWhat the Devil, I say again!î exclaimed the gaoler, left with his wife. ìHowmany more!î            

The gaolerís wife, being provided with no answer to the question, merelyreplied, ìOne must have patience, my dear!î Three turnkeys who enteredresponsive to a bell she rang, echoed the sentiment, and one added, ìFor thelove of Liberty;î which sounded in that place like an inappropriate conclusion.        

The prison of La Force was a gloomy prison, dark and filthy, and with ahorrible smell of foul sleep in it. Extraordinary how soon the noisome flavourof imprisoned sleep, becomes manifest in all such places that are ill caredfor!            

ìIn secret, too,î grumbled the gaoler, looking at the written paper. ìAs if Iwas not already full to bursting!î            

He stuck the paper on a file, in an ill-humour, and Charles Darnay awaited hisfurther pleasure for half an hour: sometimes, pacing to and fro in the strongarched room: sometimes, resting on a stone seat: in either case detained to beimprinted on the memory of the chief and his subordinates.            

ìCome!î said the chief, at length taking up his keys, ìcome with me,emigrant.î            

Through the dismal prison twilight, his new charge accompanied him by corridorand staircase, many doors clanging and locking behind them, until they came intoa large, low, vaulted chamber, crowded with prisoners of both sexes. The womenwere seated at a long table, reading and writing, knitting, sewing, andembroidering; the men were for the most part standing behind their chairs orlingering up and down the room.            

In the instinctive association of prisoners with shameful crime and disgrace,the new-comer recoiled from this company. But the crowning unreality of his longunreal ride, was, their all at once rising to receive him, with every refinementof manner known to the time, and with all the engaging graces and courtesies oflife.            

So strangely clouded were these refinements by the prison manners and gloom,so spectral did they become in the inappropriate squalor and misery throughwhich they were seen, that Charles Darnay seemed to stand in a company of thedead. Ghosts all! The ghost of beauty, the ghost of stateliness, the ghost ofelegance, the ghost of pride, the ghost of frivolity, the ghost of wit, theghost of youth, the ghost of age, all waiting their dismissal from the desolateshore, all turning on him eyes that were changed by the death they had died incoming there.            

It struck him motionless. The gaoler standing at his side, and the othergaolers moving about, who would have been well enough as to appearance in theordinary exercise of their functions, looked so extravagantly coarse contrastedwith sorrowing mothers and blooming daughters who were thereówith theapparitions of the coquette, the young beauty, and the mature woman delicatelybredóthat the inversion of all experience and likelihood which the scene ofshadows presented, was heightened to its utmost. Surely, ghosts all. Surely, thelong unreal ride some progress of disease that had brought him to these gloomyshades!            

ìIn the name of the assembled companions in misfortune,î said a gentleman ofcourtly appearance and address, coming forward, ìI have the honour of giving youwelcome to La Force, and of condoling with you on the calamity that has broughtyou among us. May it soon terminate happily! It would be an impertinenceelsewhere, but it is not so here, to ask your name and condition?î            

Charles Darnay roused himself, and gave the required information, in words assuitable as he could find.            

ìBut I hope,î said the gentleman, following the chief gaoler with his eyes,who moved across the room, ìthat you are not in secret?î            

ìI do not understand the meaning of the term, but I have heard them sayso.î            

ìAh, what a pity! We so much regret it! But take courage; several members ofour society have been in secret, at first, and it has lasted but a short time.îThen he added, raising his voice, ìI grieve to inform the societyóinsecret.î            

There was a murmur of commiseration as Charles Darnay crossed the room to agrated door where the gaoler awaited him, and many voicesóamong which, the softand compassionate voices of women were conspicuousógave him good wishes andencouragement. He turned at the grated door, to render the thanks of his heart;it closed under the gaolerís hand; and the apparitions vanished from his sightforever.            

The wicket opened on a stone staircase, leading upward. When they had ascendedforty steps (the prisoner of half an hour already counted them), the gaoleropened a low black door, and they passed into a solitary cell. It struck coldand damp, but was not dark.            

ìYours,î said the gaoler.            

ìWhy am I confined alone?î            

ìHow do I know!î            

ìI can buy pen, ink, and paper?î            

ìSuch are not my orders. You will be visited, and can ask then. At present,you may buy your food, and nothing more.î            

There were in the cell, a chair, a table, and a straw mattress. As the gaolermade a general inspection of these objects, and of the four walls, before goingout, a wandering fancy wandered through the mind of the prisoner leaning againstthe wall opposite to him, that this gaoler was so unwholesomely bloated, both inface and person, as to look like a man who had been drowned and filled withwater. When the gaoler was gone, he thought in the same wandering way, ìNow am Ileft, as if I were dead.î Stopping then, to look down at the mattress, he turnedfrom it with a sick feeling, and thought, ìAnd here in these crawling creaturesis the first condition of the body after death.î            

ìFive paces by four and a half, five paces by four and a half, five paces byfour and a half.î The prisoner walked to and fro in his cell, counting itsmeasurement, and the roar of the city arose like muffled drums with a wild swellof voices added to them. ìHe made shoes, he made shoes, he made shoes.î Theprisoner counted the measurement again, and paced faster, to draw his mind withhim from that latter repetition. ìThe ghosts that vanished when the wicketclosed. There was one among them, the appearance of a lady dressed in black, whowas leaning in the embrasure of a window, and she had a light shining upon hergolden hair, and she looked like * * * * Let us ride on again, for Godís sake,through the illuminated villages with the people all awake! * * * * He madeshoes, he made shoes, he made shoes. * * * * Five paces by four and a half.îWith such scraps tossing and rolling upward from the depths of his mind, theprisoner walked faster and faster, obstinately counting and counting; and theroar of the city changed to this extentóthat it still rolled in like muffleddrums, but with the wail of voices that he knew, in the swell that rose abovethem. Book Three: The Track of the Storm            

Tellsonís Bank, established in the Saint Germain Quarter of Paris, was in awing of a large house, approached by a courtyard and shut off from the street bya high wall and a strong gate. The house belonged to a great nobleman who hadlived in it until he made a flight from the troubles, in his own cookís dress,and got across the borders. A mere beast of the chase flying from hunters, hewas still in his metempsychosis no other than the same Monseigneur, thepreparation of whose chocolate for whose lips had once occupied three strong menbesides the cook in question.            

Monseigneur gone, and the three strong men absolving themselves from the sinof having drawn his high wages, by being more than ready and willing to cut histhroat on the altar of the dawning Republic one and indivisible of Liberty,Equality, Fraternity, or Death, Monseigneurís house had been first sequestrated,and then confiscated. For, all things moved so fast, and decree followed decreewith that fierce precipitation, that now upon the third night of the autumnmonth of September, patriot emissaries of the law were in possession ofMonseigneurís house, and had marked it with the tri-colour, and were drinkingbrandy in its state apartments.            

A place of business in London like Tellsonís place of business in Paris, wouldsoon have driven the House out of its mind and into the Gazette. For, what wouldstaid British responsibility and respectability have said to orange-trees inboxes in a Bank courtyard, and even to a Cupid over the counter? Yet such thingswere. Tellsonís had whitewashed the Cupid, but he was still to be seen on theceiling, in the coolest linen, aiming (as he very often does) at money frommorning to night. Bankruptcy must inevitably have come of this young Pagan, inLombard-street, London, and also of a curtained alcove in the rear of theimmortal boy, and also of a looking-glass let into the wall, and also of clerksnot at all old, who danced in public on the slightest provocation. Yet, a FrenchTellsonís could get on with these things exceedingly well, and, as long as thetimes held together, no man had taken fright at them, and drawn out hismoney.            

What money would be drawn out of Tellsonís henceforth, and what would liethere, lost and forgotten; what plate and jewels would tarnish in Tellsoníshiding-places, while the depositors rusted in prisons, and when they should haveviolently perished; how many accounts with Tellsonís never to be balanced inthis world, must be carried over into the next; no man could have said, thatnight, any more than Mr. Jarvis Lorry could, though he thought heavily of thesequestions. He sat by a newly-lighted wood fire (the blighted and unfruitful yearwas prematurely cold), and on his honest and courageous face there was a deepershade than the pendent lamp could throw, or any object in the room distortedlyreflectóa shade of horror.            

He occupied rooms in the Bank, in his fidelity to the House of which he hadgrown to be a part, like strong root-ivy. It chanced that they derived a kind ofsecurity from the patriotic occupation of the main building, but thetrue-hearted old gentleman never calculated about that. All such circumstanceswere indifferent to him, so that he did his duty. On the opposite side of thecourtyard, under a colonnade, was extensive standingófor carriagesówhere,indeed, some carriages of Monseigneur yet stood. Against two of the pillars werefastened two great flaring flambeaux, and in the light of these, standing out inthe open air, was a large grindstone: a roughly mounted thing which appeared tohave hurriedly been brought there from some neighbouring smithy, or otherworkshop. Rising and looking out of window at these harmless objects, Mr. Lorryshivered, and retired to his seat by the fire. He had opened, not only the glasswindow, but the lattice blind outside it, and he had closed both again, and heshivered through his frame.            

From the streets beyond the high wall and the strong gate, there came theusual night hum of the city, with now and then an indescribable ring in it,weird and unearthly, as if some unwonted sounds of a terrible nature were goingup to Heaven.            

ìThank God,î said Mr. Lorry, clasping his hands, ìthat no one near and dear tome is in this dreadful town to-night. May He have mercy on all who are indanger!î            

Soon afterwards, the bell at the great gate sounded, and he thought, ìTheyhave come back!î and sat listening. But, there was no loud irruption into thecourtyard, as he had expected, and he heard the gate clash again, and all wasquiet.            

The nervousness and dread that were upon him inspired that vague uneasinessrespecting the Bank, which a great change would naturally awaken, with suchfeelings roused. It was well guarded, and he got up to go among the trustypeople who were watching it, when his door suddenly opened, and two figuresrushed in, at sight of which he fell back in amazement.            

Lucie and her father! Lucie with her arms stretched out to him, and with thatold look of earnestness so concentrated and intensified, that it seemed asthough it had been stamped upon her face expressly to give force and power to itin this one passage of her life.            

ìWhat is this?î cried Mr. Lorry, breathless and confused. ìWhat is the matter?Lucie! Manette! What has happened? What has brought you here? What isit?î            

With the look fixed upon him, in her paleness and wildness, she panted out inhis arms, imploringly, ìO my dear friend! My husband!î            

ìYour husband, Lucie?î            

ìCharles.î            

ìWhat of Charles?î            

ìHere.            

ìHere, in Paris?î            

ìHas been here some daysóthree or fouróI donít know how manyóI canít collectmy thoughts. An errand of generosity brought him here unknown to us; he wasstopped at the barrier, and sent to prison.î            

The old man uttered an irrepressible cry. Almost at the same moment, the begof the great gate rang again, and a loud noise of feet and voices came pouringinto the courtyard.            

ìWhat is that noise?î said the Doctor, turning towards the window.            

ìDonít look!î cried Mr. Lorry. ìDonít look out! Manette, for your life, doníttouch the blind!î            

The Doctor turned, with his hand upon the fastening of the window, and said,with a cool, bold smile:            

ìMy dear friend, I have a charmed life in this city. I have been a Bastilleprisoner. There is no patriot in Parisóin Paris? In Franceówho, knowing me tohave been a prisoner in the Bastille, would touch me, except to overwhelm mewith embraces, or carry me in triumph. My old pain has given me a power that hasbrought us through the barrier, and gained us news of Charles there, and broughtus here. I knew it would be so; I knew I could help Charles out of all danger; Itold Lucie so. óWhat is that noise?î His hand was again upon the window.            

ìDonít look!î cried Mr. Lorry, absolutely desperate. ìNo, Lucie, my dear, noryou!î He got his arm round her, and held her. ìDonít be so terrified, my love. Isolemnly swear to you that I know of no harm having happened to Charles; that Ihad no suspicion even of his being in this fatal place. What prison is hein?î            

ìLa Force!î            

ìLa Force! Lucie, my child, if ever you were brave and serviceable in yourlifeóand you were always bothóyou will compose yourself now, to do exactly as Ibid you; for more depends upon it than you can think, or I can say. There is nohelp for you in any action on your part to-night; you cannot possibly stir out.I say this, because what I must bid you to do for Charlesís sake, is the hardestthing to do of all. You must instantly be obedient, still, and quiet. You mustlet me put you in a room at the back here. You must leave your father and mealone for two minutes, and as there are Life and Death in the world you must notdelay.î            

ìI will be submissive to you. I see in your face that you know I can donothing else than this. I know you are true.î            

The old man kissed her, and hurried her into his room, and turned the key;then, came hurrying back to the Doctor, and opened the window and partly openedthe blind, and put his hand upon the Doctorís arm, and looked out with him intothe courtyard.            

Looked out upon a throng of men and women: not enough in number, or nearenough, to fill the courtyard: not more than forty or fifty in all. The peoplein possession of the house had let them in at the gate, and they had rushed into work at the grindstone; it had evidently been set up there for their purpose,as in a convenient and retired spot.            

But, such awful workers, and such awful work!            

The grindstone had a double handle, and, turning at it madly were two men,whose faces, as their long hair flapped back when the whirlings of thegrindstone brought their faces up, were more horrible and cruel than the visagesof the wildest savages in their most barbarous disguise. False eyebrows andfalse moustaches were stuck upon them, and their hideous countenances were allbloody and sweaty, and all awry with howling, and all staring and glaring withbeastly excitement and want of sleep. As these ruffians turned and turned, theirmatted locks now flung forward over their eyes, now flung backward over theirnecks, some women held wine to their mouths that they might drink; and what withdropping blood, and what with dropping wine, and what with the stream of sparksstruck out of the stone, all their wicked atmosphere seemed gore and fire. Theeye could not detect one creature in the group free from the smear of blood.Shouldering one another to get next at the sharpening-stone, were men strippedto the waist, with the stain all over their limbs and bodies; men in all sortsof rags, with the stain upon those rags; men devilishly set off with spoils ofwomenís lace and silk and ribbon, with the stain dyeing those trifles throughand through. Hatchets, knives, bayonets, swords, all brought to be sharpened,were all red with it. Some of the hacked swords were tied to the wrists of thosewho carried them, with strips of linen and fragments of dress: ligatures variousin kind, but all deep of the one colour. And as the frantic wielders of theseweapons snatched them from the stream of sparks and tore away into the streets,the same red hue was red in their frenzied eyes; óeyes which any unbrutalisedbeholder would have given twenty years of life, to petrify with a well-directedgun.            

All this was seen in a moment, as the vision of a drowning man, or of anyhuman creature at any very great pass, could see a world if it were there. Theydrew back from the window, and the Doctor looked for explanation in his friendísashy face.            

ìThey are,î Mr. Lorry whispered the words, glancing fearfully round at thelocked room, ìmurdering the prisoners. If you are sure of what you say; if youreally have the power you think you haveóas I believe you haveómake yourselfknown to these devils, and get taken to La Force. It may be too late, I donítknow, but let it not be a minute later!î            

Doctor Manette pressed his hand, hastened bareheaded out of the room, and wasin the courtyard when Mr. Lorry regained the blind.            

His streaming white hair, his remarkable face, and the impetuous confidence ofhis manner, as he put the weapons aside like water, carried him in an instant tothe heart of the concourse at the stone. For a few moments there was a pause,and a hurry, and a murmur, and the unintelligible sound of his voice; and thenMr. Lorry saw him, surrounded by all, and in the midst of a line of twenty menlong, all linked shoulder to shoulder, and hand to shoulder, hurried out withcries ofóîLive the Bastille prisoner! Help for the Bastille prisonerís kindredin La Force! Room for the Bastille prisoner in front there! Save the prisonerEvremonde at La Force!î and a thousand answering shouts.            

He closed the lattice again with a fluttering heart, closed the window and thecurtain, hastened to Lucie, and told her that her father was assisted by thepeople, and gone in search of her husband. He found her child and Miss Prosswith her; but, it never occurred to him to be surprised by their appearanceuntil a long time afterwards, when he sat watching them in such quiet as thenight knew.            

Lucie had, by that time, fallen into a stupor on the floor at his feet,clinging to his hand. Miss Pross had laid the child down on his own bed, and herhead had gradually fallen on the pillow beside her pretty charge. O the long,long night, with the moans of the poor wife! And O the long, long night, with noreturn of her father and no tidings!            

Twice more in the darkness the bell at the great gate sounded, and theirruption was repeated, and the grindstone whirled and spluttered. ìWhat is it?îcried Lucie, affrighted. ìHush! The soldiersí swords are sharpened there,î saidMr. Lorry. ìThe place is national property now, and used as a kind of armoury,my love.î            

Twice more in all; but, the last spell of work was feeble and fitful. Soonafterwards the day began to dawn, and he softly detached himself from theclasping hand, and cautiously looked out again. A man, so besmeared that hemight have been a sorely wounded soldier creeping back to consciousness on afield of slain, was rising from the pavement by the side of the grindstone, andlooking about him with a vacant air. Shortly, this worn-out murderer descried inthe imperfect light one of the carriages of Monseigneur, and, staggering to thatgorgeous vehicle, climbed in at the door, and shut himself up to take his reston its dainty cushions.            

The great grindstone, Earth, had turned when Mr. Lorry looked out again, andthe sun was red on the courtyard. But, the lesser grindstone stood alone therein the calm morning air, with a red upon it that the sun had never given, andwould never take away.            

One of the first considerations which arose in the business mind of Mr. Lorrywhen business hours came round, was this: óthat he had no right to imperilTellsonís by sheltering the wife of an emigrant prisoner under the Bank roof.His own possessions, safety, life, he would have hazarded for Lucie and herchild, without a momentís demur; but the great trust he held was not his own,and as to that business charge he was a strict man of business.            

At first, his mind reverted to Defarge, and he thought of finding out thewine-shop again and taking counsel with its master in reference to the safestdwelling-place in the distracted state of the city. But, the same considerationthat suggested him, repudiated him; he lived in the most violent Quarter, anddoubtless was influential there, and deep in its dangerous workings.            

Noon coming, and the Doctor not returning, and every minuteís delay tending tocompromise Tellsonís, Mr. Lorry advised with Lucie. She said that her father hadspoken of hiring a lodging for a short term, in that Quarter, near theBanking-house. As there was no business objection to this, and as he foresawthat even if it were all well with Charles, and he were to be released, he couldnot hope to leave the city, Mr. Lorry went out in quest of such a lodging, andfound a suitable one, high up in a removed by-street where the closed blinds inall the other windows of a high melancholy square of buildings marked desertedhomes.            

To this lodging he at once removed Lucie and her child, and Miss Pross: givingthem what comfort he could, and much more than he had himself. He left Jerrywith them, as a figure to fill a doorway that would bear considerable knockingon the head, and retained to his own occupations. A disturbed and doleful mindhe brought to bear upon them, and slowly and heavily the day lagged on withhim.            

It wore itself out, and wore him out with it, until the Bank closed. He wasagain alone in his room of the previous night, considering what to do next, whenhe heard a foot upon the stair. In a few moments, a man stood in his presence,who, with a keenly observant look at him, addressed him by his name.            

ìYour servant,î said Mr. Lorry. ìDo you know me?î            

He was a strongly made man with dark curling hair, from forty-five to fiftyyears of age. For answer he repeated, without any change of emphasis, thewords:            

ìDo you know me?î            

ìI have seen you somewhere.î            

ìPerhaps at my wine-shop?î            

Much interested and agitated, Mr. Lorry said: ìYou come from DoctorManette?î            

ìYes. I come from Doctor Manette.î            

ìAnd what says he? What does he send me?î            

Defarge gave into his anxious hand, an open scrap of paper. It bore the wordsin the Doctorís writing:            

ìCharles is safe, but I cannot safely leave this place yet. I have obtainedthe favour that the bearer has a short note from Charles to his wife. Let thebearer see his wife.î            

It was dated from La Force, within an hour.            

ìWill you accompany me,î said Mr. Lorry, joyfully relieved after reading thisnote aloud, ìto where his wife resides?î            

ìYes,î returned Defarge.            

Scarcely noticing as yet, in what a curiously reserved and mechanical wayDefarge spoke, Mr. Lorry put on his hat and they went down into the courtyard.There, they found two women; one, knitting.            

ìMadame Defarge, surely!î said Mr. Lorry, who had left her in exactly the sameattitude some seventeen years ago.            

ìIt is she,î observed her husband.            

ìDoes Madame go with us?î inquired Mr. Lorry, seeing that she moved as theymoved.            

ìYes. That she may be able to recognise the faces and know the persons. It isfor their safety.î            

Beginning to be struck by Defargeís manner, Mr. Lorry looked dubiously at him,and led the way. Both the women followed; the second woman being TheVengeance.            

They passed through the intervening streets as quickly as they might, ascendedthe staircase of the new domicile, were admitted by Jerry, and found Lucieweeping, alone. She was thrown into a transport by the tidings Mr. Lorry gaveher of her husband, and clasped the hand that delivered his noteólittle thinkingwhat it had been doing near him in the night, and might, but for a chance, havedone to him.            

ìDEAREST, óTake courage. I am well, and your father has influence around me.You cannot answer this. Kiss our child for me.î            

That was all the writing. It was so much, however, to her who received it,that she turned from Defarge to his wife, and kissed one of the hands thatknitted. It was a passionate, loving, thankful, womanly action, but the handmade no responseódropped cold and heavy, and took to its knitting again.            

There was something in its touch that gave Lucie a check. She stopped in theact of putting the note in her bosom, and, with her hands yet at her neck,looked terrified at Madame Defarge. Madame Defarge met the lifted eyebrows andforehead with a cold, impassive stare.            

ìMy dear,î said Mr. Lorry, striking in to explain; ìthere are frequent risingsin the streets; and, although it is not likely they will ever trouble you,Madame Defarge wishes to see those whom she has the power to protect at suchtimes, to the end that she may know themóthat she may identify them. I believe,îsaid Mr. Lorry, rather halting in his reassuring words, as the stony manner ofall the three impressed itself upon him more and more, ìI state the case,Citizen Defarge?î            

Defarge looked gloomily at his wife, and gave no other answer than a gruffsound of acquiescence.            

ìYou had better, Lucie,î said Mr. Lorry, doing all he could to propitiate, bytone and manner, ìhave the dear child here, and our good Pross. Our good Pross,Defarge, is an English lady, and knows no French.î            

The lady in question, whose rooted conviction that she was more than a matchfor any foreigner, was not to be shaken by distress and, danger, appeared withfolded arms, and observed in English to The Vengeance, whom her eyes firstencountered, ìWell, I am sure, Boldface! I hope YOU are pretty well!î She alsobestowed a British cough on Madame Defarge; but, neither of the two took muchheed of her.            

ìIs that his child?î said Madame Defarge, stopping in her work for the firsttime, and pointing her knitting-needle at little Lucie as if it were the fingerof Fate.            

ìYes, madame,î answered Mr. Lorry; ìthis is our poor prisonerís darlingdaughter, and only child.î            

The shadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed to fall sothreatening and dark on the child, that her mother instinctively kneeled on theground beside her, and held her to her breast. The shadow attendant on MadameDefarge and her party seemed then to fall, threatening and dark, on both themother and the child.            

ìIt is enough, my husband,î said Madame Defarge. ìI have seen them. We maygo.î            

But, the suppressed manner had enough of menace in itónot visible andpresented, but indistinct and withheldóto alarm Lucie into saying, as she laidher appealing hand on Madame Defargeís dress:            

ìYou will be good to my poor husband. You will do him no harm. You will helpme to see him if you can?î            

ìYour husband is not my business here,î returned Madame Defarge, looking downat her with perfect composure. ìIt is the daughter of your father who is mybusiness here.î            

ìFor my sake, then, be merciful to my husband. For my childís sake! She willput her hands together and pray you to be merciful. We are more afraid of youthan of these others.î            

Madame Defarge received it as a compliment, and looked at her husband.Defarge, who had been uneasily biting his thumb-nail and looking at her,collected his face into a sterner expression.            

ìWhat is it that your husband says in that little letter?î asked MadameDefarge, with a lowering smile. ìInfluence; he says something touchinginfluence?î            

ìThat my father,î said Lucie, hurriedly taking the paper from her breast, butwith her alarmed eyes on her questioner and not on it, ìhas much influencearound him.î            

ìSurely it will release him!î said Madame Defarge. ìLet it do so.î            

ìAs a wife and mother,î cried Lucie, most earnestly, ìI implore you to havepity on me and not to exercise any power that you possess, against my innocenthusband, but to use it in his behalf. O sister-woman, think of me. As a wife andmother!î            

Madame Defarge looked, coldly as ever, at the suppliant, and said, turning toher friend The Vengeance:            

ìThe wives and mothers we have been used to see, since we were as little asthis child, and much less, have not been greatly considered? We have known THEIRhusbands and fathers laid in prison and kept from them, often enough? All ourlives, we have seen our sister-women suffer, in themselves and in theirchildren, poverty, nakedness, hunger, thirst, sickness, misery, oppression andneglect of all kinds?î            

ìWe have seen nothing else,î returned The Vengeance.            

ìWe have borne this a long time,î said Madame Defarge, turning her eyes againupon Lucie. ìJudge you! Is it likely that the trouble of one wife and motherwould be much to us now?î            

She resumed her knitting and went out. The Vengeance followed. Defarge wentlast, and closed the door.            

ìCourage, my dear Lucie,î said Mr. Lorry, as he raised her. ìCourage, courage!So far all goes well with usómuch, much better than it has of late gone withmany poor souls. Cheer up, and have a thankful heart.î            

ìI am not thankless, I hope, but that dreadful woman seems to throw a shadowon me and on all my hopes.î            

ìTut, tut!î said Mr. Lorry; ìwhat is this despondency in the brave littlebreast? A shadow indeed! No substance in it, Lucie.î            

But the shadow of the manner of these Defarges was dark upon himself, for allthat, and in his secret mind it troubled him greatly.            

Doctor Manette did not return until the morning of the fourth day of hisabsence. So much of what had happened in that dreadful time as could be keptfrom the knowledge of Lucie was so well concealed from her, that not until longafterwards, when France and she were far apart, did she know that eleven hundreddefenceless prisoners of both sexes and all ages had been killed by thepopulace; that four days and nights had been darkened by this deed of horror;and that the air around her had been tainted by the slain. She only knew thatthere had been an attack upon the prisons, that all political prisoners had beenin danger, and that some had been dragged out by the crowd and murdered.            

To Mr. Lorry, the Doctor communicated under an injunction of secrecy on whichhe had no need to dwell, that the crowd had taken him through a scene of carnageto the prison of La Force. That, in the prison he had found a self-appointedTribunal sitting, before which the prisoners were brought singly, and by whichthey were rapidly ordered to be put forth to be massacred, or to be released, or(in a few cases) to be sent back to their cells. That, presented by hisconductors to this Tribunal, he had announced himself by name and profession ashaving been for eighteen years a secret and unaccused prisoner in the Bastille;that, one of the body so sitting in judgment had risen and identified him, andthat this man was Defarge.            

That, hereupon he had ascertained, through the registers on the table, thathis son-in-law was among the living prisoners, and had pleaded hard to theTribunalóof whom some members were asleep and some awake, some dirty with murderand some clean, some sober and some notófor his life and liberty. That, in thefirst frantic greetings lavished on himself as a notable sufferer under theoverthrown system, it had been accorded to him to have Charles Darnay broughtbefore the lawless Court, and examined. That, he seemed on the point of being atonce released, when the tide in his favour met with some unexplained check (notintelligible to the Doctor), which led to a few words of secret conference.That, the man sitting as President had then informed Doctor Manette that theprisoner must remain in custody, but should, for his sake, be held inviolate insafe custody. That, immediately, on a signal, the prisoner was removed to theinterior of the prison again; but, that he, the Doctor, had then so stronglypleaded for permission to remain and assure himself that his son-in-law was,through no malice or mischance, delivered to the concourse whose murderous yellsoutside the gate had often drowned the proceedings, that he had obtained thepermission, and had remained in that Hall of Blood until the danger wasover.            

The sights he had seen there, with brief snatches of food and sleep byintervals, shall remain untold. The mad joy over the prisoners who were saved,had astounded him scarcely less than the mad ferocity against those who were cutto pieces. One prisoner there was, he said, who had been discharged into thestreet free, but at whom a mistaken savage had thrust a pike as he passed out.Being besought to go to him and dress the wound, the Doctor had passed out atthe same gate, and had found him in the arms of a company of Samaritans, whowere seated on the bodies of their victims. With an inconsistency as monstrousas anything in this awful nightmare, they had helped the healer, and tended thewounded man with the gentlest solicitudeóhad made a litter for him and escortedhim carefully from the spotóhad then caught up their weapons and plunged anewinto a butchery so dreadful, that the Doctor had covered his eyes with hishands, and swooned away in the midst of it.            

As Mr. Lorry received these confidences, and as he watched the face of hisfriend now sixty-two years of age, a misgiving arose within him that such dreadexperiences would revive the old danger.            

But, he had never seen his friend in his present aspect: he had never at allknown him in his present character. For the first time the Doctor felt, now,that his suffering was strength and power. For the first time he felt that inthat sharp fire, he had slowly forged the iron which could break the prison doorof his daughterís husband, and deliver him. ìIt all tended to a good end, myfriend; it was not mere waste and ruin. As my beloved child was helpful inrestoring me to myself, I will be helpful now in restoring the dearest part ofherself to her; by the aid of Heaven I will do it!î Thus, Doctor Manette. Andwhen Jarvis Lorry saw the kindled eyes, the resolute face, the calm strong lookand bearing of the man whose life always seemed to him to have been stopped,like a clock, for so many years, and then set going again with an energy whichhad lain dormant during the cessation of its usefulness, he believed.            

Greater things than the Doctor had at that time to contend with, would haveyielded before his persevering purpose. While he kept himself in his place, as aphysician, whose business was with all degrees of mankind, bond and free, richand poor, bad and good, he used his personal influence so wisely, that he wassoon the inspecting physician of three prisons, and among them of La Force. Hecould now assure Lucie that her husband was no longer confined alone, but wasmixed with the general body of prisoners; he saw her husband weekly, and broughtsweet messages to her, straight from his lips; sometimes her husband himselfsent a letter to her (though never by the Doctorís hand), but she was notpermitted to write to him: for, among the many wild suspicions of plots in theprisons, the wildest of all pointed at emigrants who were known to have madefriends or permanent connections abroad.            

This new life of the Doctorís was an anxious life, no doubt; still, thesagacious Mr. Lorry saw that there was a new sustaining pride in it. Nothingunbecoming tinged the pride; it was a natural and worthy one; but he observed itas a curiosity. The Doctor knew, that up to that time, his imprisonment had beenassociated in the minds of his daughter and his friend, with his personalaffliction, deprivation, and weakness. Now that this was changed, and he knewhimself to be invested through that old trial with forces to which they bothlooked for Charlesís ultimate safety and deliverance, he became so far exaltedby the change, that he took the lead and direction, and required them as theweak, to trust to him as the strong. The preceding relative positions of himselfand Lucie were reversed, yet only as the liveliest gratitude and affection couldreverse them, for he could have had no pride but in rendering some service toher who had rendered so much to him. ìAll curious to see,î thought Mr. Lorry, inhis amiably shrewd way, ìbut all natural and right; so, take the lead, my dearfriend, and keep it; it couldnít be in better hands.î            

But, though the Doctor tried hard, and never ceased trying, to get CharlesDarnay set at liberty, or at least to get him brought to trial, the publiccurrent of the time set too strong and fast for him. The new era began; the kingwas tried, doomed, and beheaded; the Republic of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity,or Death, declared for victory or death against the world in arms; the blackflag waved night and day from the great towers of Notre Dame; three hundredthousand men, summoned to rise against the tyrants of the earth, rose from allthe varying soils of France, as if the dragonís teeth had been sown broadcast,and had yielded fruit equally on hill and plain, on rock, in gravel, andalluvial mud, under the bright sky of the South and under the clouds of theNorth, in fell and forest, in the vineyards and the olive-grounds and among thecropped grass and the stubble of the corn, along the fruitful banks of the broadrivers, and in the sand of the sea-shore. What private solicitude could rearitself against the deluge of the Year One of Libertyóthe deluge rising frombelow, not falling from above, and with the windows of Heaven shut, notopened!            

There was no pause, no pity, no peace, no interval of relenting rest, nomeasurement of time. Though days and nights circled as regularly as when timewas young, and the evening and morning were the first day, other count of timethere was none. Hold of it was lost in the raging fever of a nation, as it is inthe fever of one patient. Now, breaking the unnatural silence of a whole city,the executioner showed the people the head of the kingóand now, it seemed almostin the same breath, the head of his fair wife which had had eight weary monthsof imprisoned widowhood and misery, to turn it grey.            

And yet, observing the strange law of contradiction which obtains in all suchcases, the time was long, while it flamed by so fast. A revolutionary tribunalin the capital, and forty or fifty thousand revolutionary committees all overthe land; a law of the Suspected, which struck away all security for liberty orlife, and delivered over any good and innocent person to any bad and guilty one;prisons gorged with people who had committed no offence, and could obtain nohearing; these things became the established order and nature of appointedthings, and seemed to be ancient usage before they were many weeks old. Aboveall, one hideous figure grew as familiar as if it had been before the generalgaze from the foundations of the worldóthe figure of the sharp female called LaGuillotine.            

It was the popular theme for jests; it was the best cure for headache, itinfallibly prevented the hair from turning grey, it imparted a peculiar delicacyto the complexion, it was the National Razor which shaved close: who kissed LaGuillotine, looked through the little window and sneezed into the sack. It wasthe sign of the regeneration of the human race. It superseded the Cross. Modelsof it were worn on breasts from which the Cross was discarded, and it was boweddown to and believed in where the Cross was denied.            

It sheared off heads so many, that it, and the ground it most polluted, were arotten red. It was taken to pieces, like a toy-puzzle for a young Devil, and wasput together again when the occasion wanted it. It hushed the eloquent, struckdown the powerful, abolished the beautiful and good. Twenty-two friends of highpublic mark, twenty-one living and one dead, it had lopped the heads off, in onemorning, in as many minutes. The name of the strong man of Old Scripture haddescended to the chief functionary who worked it; but, so armed, he was strongerthan his namesake, and blinder, and tore away the gates of Godís own Templeevery day.            

Among these terrors, and the brood belonging to them, the Doctor walked with asteady head: confident in his power, cautiously persistent in his end, neverdoubting that he would save Lucieís husband at last. Yet the current of the timeswept by, so strong and deep, and carried the time away so fiercely, thatCharles had lain in prison one year and three months when the Doctor was thussteady and confident. So much more wicked and distracted had the Revolutiongrown in that December month, that the rivers of the South were encumbered withthe bodies of the violently drowned by night, and prisoners were shot in linesand squares under the southern wintry sun. Still, the Doctor walked among theterrors with a steady head. No man better known than he, in Paris at that day;no man in a stranger situation. Silent, humane, indispensable in hospital andprison, using his art equally among assassins and victims, he was a man apart.In the exercise of his skill, the appearance and the story of the BastilleCaptive removed him from all other men. He was not suspected or brought inquestion, any more than if he had indeed been recalled to life some eighteenyears before, or were a Spirit moving among mortals.            

One year and three months. During all that time Lucie was never sure, fromhour to hour, but that the Guillotine would strike off her husbandís head nextday. Every day, through the stony streets, the tumbrils now jolted heavily,filled with Condemned. Lovely girls; bright women, brown-haired, black-haired,and grey; youths; stalwart men and old; gentle born and peasant born; all redwine for La Guillotine, all daily brought into light from the dark cellars ofthe loathsome prisons, and carried to her through the streets to slake herdevouring thirst. Liberty, equality, fraternity, or death;óthe last, much theeasiest to bestow, O Guillotine!            

If the suddenness of her calamity, and the whirling wheels of the time, hadstunned the Doctorís daughter into awaiting the result in idle despair, it wouldbut have been with her as it was with many. But, from the hour when she hadtaken the white head to her fresh young bosom in the garret of Saint Antoine,she had been true to her duties. She was truest to them in the season of trial,as all the quietly loyal and good will always be.            

As soon as they were established in their new residence, and her father hadentered on the routine of his avocations, she arranged the little household asexactly as if her husband had been there. Everything had its appointed place andits appointed time. Little Lucie she taught, as regularly, as if they had allbeen united in their English home. The slight devices with which she cheatedherself into the show of a belief that they would soon be reunitedóthe littlepreparations for his speedy return, the setting aside of his chair and hisbooksóthese, and the solemn prayer at night for one dear prisoner especially,among the many unhappy souls in prison and the shadow of death--were almost theonly outspoken reliefs of her heavy mind.            

She did not greatly alter in appearance. The plain dark dresses, akin tomourning dresses, which she and her child wore, were as neat and as wellattended to as the brighter clothes of happy days. She lost her colour, and theold and intent expression was a constant, not an occasional, thing; otherwise,she remained very pretty and comely. Sometimes, at night on kissing her father,she would burst into the grief she had repressed all day, and would say that hersole reliance, under Heaven, was on him. He always resolutely answered: ìNothingcan happen to him without my knowledge, and I know that I can save him,Lucie.î            

They had not made the round of their changed life many weeks, when her fathersaid to her, on coming home one evening:            

ìMy dear, there is an upper window in the prison, to which Charles cansometimes gain access at three in the afternoon. When he can get to itówhichdepends on many uncertainties and incidentsóhe might see you in the street, hethinks, if you stood in a certain place that I can show you. But you will not beable to see him, my poor child, and even if you could, it would be unsafe foryou to make a sign of recognition.î            

ìO show me the place, my father, and I will go there every day.î            

From that time, in all weathers, she waited there two hours. As the clockstruck two, she was there, and at four she turned resignedly away. When it wasnot too wet or inclement for her child to be with her, they went together; atother times she was alone; but, she never missed a single day.            

It was the dark and dirty corner of a small winding street. The hovel of acutter of wood into lengths for burning, was the only house at that end; allelse was wall. On the third day of her being there, he noticed her.            

ìGood day, citizeness.î            

ìGood day, citizen.î            

This mode of address was now prescribed by decree. It had been establishedvoluntarily some time ago, among the more thorough patriots; but, was now lawfor everybody.            

ìWalking here again, citizeness?î            

ìYou see me, citizen!î            

The wood-sawyer, who was a little man with a redundancy of gesture (he hadonce been a mender of roads), cast a glance at the prison, pointed at theprison, and putting his ten fingers before his face to represent bars, peepedthrough them jocosely.            

ìBut itís not my business,î said he. And went on sawing his wood.            

Next day he was looking out for her, and accosted her the moment sheappeared.            

ìWhat? Walking here again, citizeness?î            

ìYes, citizen.î            

ìAh! A child too! Your mother, is it not, my little citizeness?î            

ìDo I say yes, mamma?î whispered little Lucie, drawing close to her.            

ìYes, dearest.î            

ìYes, citizen.î            

ìAh! But itís not my business. My work is my business. See my saw! I call itmy Little Guillotine. La, la, la; La, la, la! And off his head comes!î            

The billet fell as he spoke, and he threw it into a basket.            

ìI call myself the Samson of the firewood guillotine. See here again! Loo,loo, loo; Loo, loo, loo! And off HER head comes! Now, a child. Tickle, tickle;Pickle, pickle! And off ITS head comes. All the family!î            

Lucie shuddered as he threw two more billets into his basket, but it wasimpossible to be there while the wood-sawyer was at work, and not be in hissight. Thenceforth, to secure his good will, she always spoke to him first, andoften gave him drink-money, which he readily received.            

He was an inquisitive fellow, and sometimes when she had quite forgotten himin gazing at the prison roof and grates, and in lifting her heart up to herhusband, she would come to herself to find him looking at her, with his knee onhis bench and his saw stopped in its work. ìBut itís not my business!î he wouldgenerally say at those times, and would briskly fall to his sawing again.            

In all weathers, in the snow and frost of winter, in the bitter winds ofspring, in the hot sunshine of summer, in the rains of autumn, and again in thesnow and frost of winter, Lucie passed two hours of every day at this place; andevery day on leaving it, she kissed the prison wall. Her husband saw her (so shelearned from her father) it might be once in five or six times: it might betwice or thrice running: it might be, not for a week or a fortnight together. Itwas enough that he could and did see her when the chances served, and on thatpossibility she would have waited out the day, seven days a week.            

These occupations brought her round to the December month, wherein her fatherwalked among the terrors with a steady head. On a lightly-snowing afternoon shearrived at the usual corner. It was a day of some wild rejoicing, and afestival. She had seen the houses, as she came along, decorated with littlepikes, and with little red caps stuck upon them; also, with tricoloured ribbons;also, with the standard inscription (tricoloured letters were the favourite),Republic One and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!            

The miserable shop of the wood-sawyer was so small, that its whole surfacefurnished very indifferent space for this legend. He had got somebody to scrawlit up for him, however, who had squeezed Death in with most inappropriatedifficulty. On his house-top, he displayed pike and cap, as a good citizen must,and in a window he had stationed his saw inscribed as his ìLittle SainteGuillotineî ófor the great sharp female was by that time popularly canonised.His shop was shut and he was not there, which was a relief to Lucie, and lefther quite alone.            

But, he was not far off, for presently she heard a troubled movement and ashouting coming along, which filled her with fear. A moment afterwards, and athrong of people came pouring round the corner by the prison wall, in the midstof whom was the wood-sawyer hand in hand with The Vengeance. There could not befewer than five hundred people, and they were dancing like five thousand demons.There was no other music than their own singing. They danced to the popularRevolution song, keeping a ferocious time that was like a gnashing of teeth inunison. Men and women danced together, women danced together, men dancedtogether, as hazard had brought them together. At first, they were a mere stormof coarse red caps and coarse woollen rags; but, as they filled the place, andstopped to dance about Lucie, some ghastly apparition of a dance-figure goneraving mad arose among them. They advanced, retreated, struck at one anotheríshands, clutched at one anotherís heads, spun round alone, caught one another andspun round in pairs, until many of them dropped. While those were down, the restlinked hand in hand, and all spun round together: then the ring broke, and inseparate rings of two and four they turned and turned until they all stopped atonce, began again, struck, clutched, and tore, and then reversed the spin, andall spun round another way. Suddenly they stopped again, paused, struck out thetime afresh, formed into lines the width of the public way, and, with theirheads low down and their hands high up, swooped screaming off. No fight couldhave been half so terrible as this dance. It was so emphatically a fallensportóa something, once innocent, delivered over to all devilryóa healthypastime changed into a means of angering the blood, bewildering the senses, andsteeling the heart. Such grace as was visible in it, made it the uglier, showinghow warped and perverted all things good by nature were become. The maidenlybosom bared to this, the pretty almost-childís head thus distracted, thedelicate foot mincing in this slough of blood and dirt, were types of thedisjointed time.            

This was the Carmagnole. As it passed, leaving Lucie frightened and bewilderedin the doorway of the wood-sawyerís house, the feathery snow fell as quietly andlay as white and soft, as if it had never been.            

ìO my father!î for he stood before her when she lifted up the eyes she hadmomentarily darkened with her hand; ìsuch a cruel, bad sight.î            

ìI know, my dear, I know. I have seen it many times. Donít be frightened! Notone of them would harm you.î            

ìI am not frightened for myself, my father. But when I think of my husband,and the mercies of these peopleóî            

ìWe will set him above their mercies very soon. I left him climbing to thewindow, and I came to tell you. There is no one here to see. You may kiss yourhand towards that highest shelving roof.î            

ìI do so, father, and I send him my Soul with it!î            

ìYou cannot see him, my poor dear?î            

ìNo, father,î said Lucie, yearning and weeping as she kissed her hand,ìno.î            

A footstep in the snow. Madame Defarge. ìI salute you, citizeness,î from theDoctor. ìI salute you, citizen.î This in passing. Nothing more. Madame Defargegone, like a shadow over the white road.            

ìGive me your arm, my love. Pass from here with an air of cheerfulness andcourage, for his sake. That was well done;î they had left the spot; ìit shallnot be in vain. Charles is summoned for to-morrow.î             

ìFor to-morrow!î            

ìThere is no time to lose. I am well prepared, but there are precautions to betaken, that could not be taken until he was actually summoned before theTribunal. He has not received the notice yet, but I know that he will presentlybe summoned for to-morrow, and removed to the Conciergerie; I have timelyinformation. You are not afraid?î            

She could scarcely answer, ìI trust in you.î            

ìDo so, implicitly. Your suspense is nearly ended, my darling; he shall berestored to you within a few hours; I have encompassed him with everyprotection. I must see Lorry.î            

He stopped. There was a heavy lumbering of wheels within hearing. They bothknew too well what it meant. One. Two. Three. Three tumbrils faring away withtheir dread loads over the hushing snow.            

ìI must see Lorry,î the Doctor repeated, turning her another way.            

The staunch old gentleman was still in his trust; had never left it. He andhis books were in frequent requisition as to property confiscated and madenational. What he could save for the owners, he saved. No better man living tohold fast by what Tellsonís had in keeping, and to hold his peace.            

A murky red and yellow sky, and a rising mist from the Seine, denoted theapproach of darkness. It was almost dark when they arrived at the Bank. Thestately residence of Monseigneur was altogether blighted and deserted. Above aheap of dust and ashes in the court, ran the letters: National Property.Republic One and Indivisible. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!            

Who could that be with Mr. Lorryóthe owner of the riding-coat upon thechairówho must not be seen? From whom newly arrived, did he come out, agitatedand surprised, to take his favourite in his arms? To whom did he appear torepeat her faltering words, when, raising his voice and turning his head towardsthe door of the room from which he had issued, he said: ìRemoved to theConciergerie, and summoned for to-morrow?î            

The dread tribunal of five Judges, Public Prosecutor, and determined Jury, satevery day. Their lists went forth every evening, and were read out by thegaolers of the various prisons to their prisoners. The standard gaoler-joke was,ìCome out and listen to the Evening Paper, you inside there!î            

ìCharles Evremonde, called Darnay!î            

So at last began the Evening Paper at La Force.            

When a name was called, its owner stepped apart into a spot reserved for thosewho were announced as being thus fatally recorded. Charles Evremonde, calledDarnay, had reason to know the usage; he had seen hundreds pass away so.            

His bloated gaoler, who wore spectacles to read with, glanced over them toassure himself that he had taken his place, and went through the list, making asimilar short pause at each name. There were twenty-three names, but only twentywere responded to; for one of the prisoners so summoned had died in gaol andbeen forgotten, and two had already been guillotined and forgotten. The list wasread, in the vaulted chamber where Darnay had seen the associated prisoners onthe night of his arrival. Every one of those had perished in the massacre; everyhuman creature he had since cared for and parted with, had died on thescaffold.            

There were hurried words of farewell and kindness, but the parting was soonover. It was the incident of every day, and the society of La Force were engagedin the preparation of some games of forfeits and a little concert, for thatevening. They crowded to the grates and shed tears there; but, twenty places inthe projected entertainments had to be refilled, and the time was, at best,short to the lock-up hour, when the common rooms and corridors would bedelivered over to the great dogs who kept watch there through the night. Theprisoners were far from insensible or unfeeling; their ways arose out of thecondition of the time. Similarly, though with a subtle difference, a species offervour or intoxication, known, without doubt, to have led some persons to bravethe guillotine unnecessarily, and to die by it, was not mere boastfulness, but awild infection of the wildly shaken public mind. In seasons of pestilence, someof us will have a secret attraction to the diseaseóa terrible passinginclination to die of it. And all of us have like wonders hidden in our breasts,only needing circumstances to evoke them.            

The passage to the Conciergerie was short and dark; the night in itsvermin-haunted cells was long and cold. Next day, fifteen prisoners were put tothe bar before Charles Darnayís name was called. All the fifteen were condemned,and the trials of the whole occupied an hour and a half.            

ìCharles Evremonde, called Darnay,î was at length arraigned.            

His judges sat upon the Bench in feathered hats; but the rough red cap andtricoloured cockade was the head-dress otherwise prevailing. Looking at the Juryand the turbulent audience, he might have thought that the usual order of thingswas reversed, and that the felons were trying the honest men. The lowest,cruelest, and worst populace of a city, never without its quantity of low,cruel, and bad, were the directing spirits of the scene: noisily commenting,applauding, disapproving, anticipating, and precipitating the result, without acheck. Of the men, the greater part were armed in various ways; of the women,some wore knives, some daggers, some ate and drank as they looked on, manyknitted. Among these last, was one, with a spare piece of knitting under her armas she worked. She was in a front row, by the side of a man whom he had neverseen since his arrival at the Barrier, but whom he directly remembered asDefarge. He noticed that she once or twice whispered in his ear, and that sheseemed to be his wife; but, what he most noticed in the two figures was, thatalthough they were posted as close to himself as they could be, they neverlooked towards him. They seemed to be waiting for something with a doggeddetermination, and they looked at the Jury, but at nothing else. Under thePresident sat Doctor Manette, in his usual quiet dress. As well as the prisonercould see, he and Mr. Lorry were the only men there, unconnected with theTribunal, who wore their usual clothes, and had not assumed the coarse garb ofthe Carmagnole.            

Charles Evremonde, called Darnay, was accused by the public prosecutor as anemigrant, whose life was forfeit to the Republic, under the decree whichbanished all emigrants on pain of Death. It was nothing that the decree boredate since his return to France. There he was, and there was the decree; he hadbeen taken in France, and his head was demanded.            

ìTake off his head!î cried the audience. ìAn enemy to the Republic!î            

The President rang his bell to silence those cries, and asked the prisonerwhether it was not true that he had lived many years in England?            

Undoubtedly it was.            

Was he not an emigrant then? What did he call himself?            

Not an emigrant, he hoped, within the sense and spirit of the law.            

Why not? the President desired to know.            

Because he had voluntarily relinquished a title that was distasteful to him,and a station that was distasteful to him, and had left his countryóhe submittedbefore the word emigrant in the present acceptation by the Tribunal was inuseóto live by his own industry in England, rather than on the industry of theoverladen people of France.            

What proof had he of this?            

He handed in the names of two witnesses; Theophile Gabelle, and AlexandreManette.            

But he had married in England? the President reminded him.            

True, but not an English woman.            

A citizeness of France?            

Yes. By birth.            

Her name and family?            

ìLucie Manette, only daughter of Doctor Manette, the good physician who sitsthere.î            

This answer had a happy effect upon the audience. Cries in exaltation of thewell-known good physician rent the hall. So capriciously were the people moved,that tears immediately rolled down several ferocious countenances which had beenglaring at the prisoner a moment before, as if with impatience to pluck him outinto the streets and kill him.            

On these few steps of his dangerous way, Charles Darnay had set his footaccording to Doctor Manetteís reiterated instructions. The same cautious counseldirected every step that lay before him, and had prepared every inch of hisroad.            

The President asked, why had he returned to France when he did, and notsooner?            

He had not returned sooner, he replied, simply because he had no means ofliving in France, save those he had resigned; whereas, in England, he lived bygiving instruction in the French language and literature. He had returned whenhe did, on the pressing and written entreaty of a French citizen, whorepresented that his life was endangered by his absence. He had come back, tosave a citizenís life, and to bear his testimony, at whatever personal hazard,to the truth. Was that criminal in the eyes of the Republic?            

The populace cried enthusiastically, ìNo!î and the President rang his bell toquiet them. Which it did not, for they continued to cry ìNo!î until they leftoff, of their own will.            

The President required the name of that citizen. The accused explained thatthe citizen was his first witness. He also referred with confidence to thecitizenís letter, which had been taken from him at the Barrier, but which he didnot doubt would be found among the papers then before the President.            

The Doctor had taken care that it should be thereóhad assured him that itwould be thereóand at this stage of the proceedings it was produced and read.Citizen Gabelle was called to confirm it, and did so. Citizen Gabelle hinted,with infinite delicacy and politeness, that in the pressure of business imposedon the Tribunal by the multitude of enemies of the Republic with which it had todeal, he had been slightly overlooked in his prison of the Abbayeóin fact, hadrather passed out of the Tribunalís patriotic remembranceóuntil three days ago;when he had been summoned before it, and had been set at liberty on the Juryísdeclaring themselves satisfied that the accusation against him was answered, asto himself, by the surrender of the citizen Evremonde, called Darnay.            

Doctor Manette was next questioned. His high personal popularity, and theclearness of his answers, made a great impression; but, as he proceeded, as heshowed that the Accused was his first friend on his release from his longimprisonment; that, the accused had remained in England, always faithful anddevoted to his daughter and himself in their exile; that, so far from being infavour with the Aristocrat government there, he had actually been tried for hislife by it, as the foe of England and friend of the United Statesóas he broughtthese circumstances into view, with the greatest discretion and with thestraightforward force of truth and earnestness, the Jury and the populace becameone. At last, when he appealed by name to Monsieur Lorry, an English gentlemanthen and there present, who, like himself, had been a witness on that Englishtrial and could corroborate his account of it, the Jury declared that they hadheard enough, and that they were ready with their votes if the President werecontent to receive them.            

At every vote (the Jurymen voted aloud and individually), the populace set upa shout of applause. All the voices were in the prisonerís favour, and thePresident declared him free.            

Then, began one of those extraordinary scenes with which the populacesometimes gratified their fickleness, or their better impulses towardsgenerosity and mercy, or which they regarded as some set-off against theirswollen account of cruel rage. No man can decide now to which of these motivessuch extraordinary scenes were referable; it is probable, to a blending of allthe three, with the second predominating. No sooner was the acquittalpronounced, than tears were shed as freely as blood at another time, and suchfraternal embraces were bestowed upon the prisoner by as many of both sexes ascould rush at him, that after his long and unwholesome confinement he was indanger of fainting from exhaustion; none the less because he knew very well,that the very same people, carried by another current, would have rushed at himwith the very same intensity, to rend him to pieces and strew him over thestreets.            

His removal, to make way for other accused persons who were to be tried,rescued him from these caresses for the moment. Five were to be tried together,next, as enemies of the Republic, forasmuch as they had not assisted it by wordor deed. So quick was the Tribunal to compensate itself and the nation for achance lost, that these five came down to him before he left the place,condemned to die within twenty-four hours. The first of them told him so, withthe customary prison sign of Deathóa raised fingeróand they all added in words,ìLong live the Republic!î            

The five had had, it is true, no audience to lengthen their proceedings, forwhen he and Doctor Manette emerged from the gate, there was a great crowd aboutit, in which there seemed to be every face he had seen in Courtóexcept two, forwhich he looked in vain. On his coming out, the concourse made at him anew,weeping, embracing, and shouting, all by turns and all together, until the verytide of the river on the bank of which the mad scene was acted, seemed to runmad, like the people on the shore.            

They put him into a great chair they had among them, and which they had takeneither out of the Court itself, or one of its rooms or passages. Over the chairthey had thrown a red flag, and to the back of it they had bound a pike with ared cap on its top. In this car of triumph, not even the Doctorís entreatiescould prevent his being carried to his home on menís shoulders, with a confusedsea of red caps heaving about him, and casting up to sight from the stormy deepsuch wrecks of faces, that he more than once misdoubted his mind being inconfusion, and that he was in the tumbril on his way to the Guillotine.            

In wild dreamlike procession, embracing whom they met and pointing him out,they carried him on. Reddening the snowy streets with the prevailing Republicancolour, in winding and tramping through them, as they had reddened them belowthe snow with a deeper dye, they carried him thus into the courtyard of thebuilding where he lived. Her father had gone on before, to prepare her, and whenher husband stood upon his feet, she dropped insensible in his arms.            

As he held her to his heart and turned her beautiful head between his face andthe brawling crowd, so that his tears and her lips might come together unseen, afew of the people fell to dancing. Instantly, all the rest fell to dancing, andthe courtyard overflowed with the Carmagnole. Then, they elevated into thevacant chair a young woman from the crowd to be carried as the Goddess ofLiberty, and then swelling and overflowing out into the adjacent streets, andalong the riverís bank, and over the bridge, the Carmagnole absorbed them everyone and whirled them away.            

After grasping the Doctorís hand, as he stood victorious and proud before him;after grasping the hand of Mr. Lorry, who came panting in breathless from hisstruggle against the waterspout of the Carmagnole; after kissing little Lucie,who was lifted up to clasp her arms round his neck; and after embracing the everzealous and faithful Pross who lifted her; he took his wife in his arms, andcarried her up to their rooms.            

ìLucie! My own! I am safe.î            

ìO dearest Charles, let me thank God for this on my knees as I have prayed toHim.î            

They all reverently bowed their heads and hearts. When she was again in hisarms, he said to her:            

ìAnd now speak to your father, dearest. No other man in all this France couldhave done what he has done for me.î            

She laid her head upon her fatherís breast, as she had laid his poor head onher own breast, long, long ago. He was happy in the return he had made her, hewas recompensed for his suffering, he was proud of his strength. ìYou must notbe weak, my darling,î he remonstrated; ìdonít tremble so. I have savedhim.î            

ìI have saved him.î It was not another of the dreams in which he had oftencome back; he was really here. And yet his wife trembled, and a vague but heavyfear was upon her.            

All the air round was so thick and dark, the people were so passionatelyrevengeful and fitful, the innocent were so constantly put to death on vaguesuspicion and black malice, it was so impossible to forget that many asblameless as her husband and as dear to others as he was to her, every dayshared the fate from which he had been clutched, that her heart could not be aslightened of its load as she felt it ought to be. The shadows of the wintryafternoon were beginning to fall, and even now the dreadful carts were rollingthrough the streets. Her mind pursued them, looking for him among the Condemned;and then she clung closer to his real presence and trembled more.            

Her father, cheering her, showed a compassionate superiority to this womanísweakness, which was wonderful to see. No garret, no shoemaking, no One Hundredand Five, North Tower, now! He had accomplished the task he had set himself, hispromise was redeemed, he had saved Charles. Let them all lean upon him.            

Their housekeeping was of a very frugal kind: not only because that was thesafest way of life, involving the least offence to the people, but because theywere not rich, and Charles, throughout his imprisonment, had had to pay heavilyfor his bad food, and for his guard, and towards the living of the poorerprisoners. Partly on this account, and partly to avoid a domestic spy, they keptno servant; the citizen and citizeness who acted as porters at the courtyardgate, rendered them occasional service; and Jerry (almost wholly transferred tothem by Mr. Lorry) had become their daily retainer, and had his bed there everynight.            

It was an ordinance of the Republic One and Indivisible of Liberty, Equality,Fraternity, or Death, that on the door or doorpost of every house, the name ofevery inmate must be legibly inscribed in letters of a certain size, at acertain convenient height from the ground. Mr. Jerry Cruncherís name, therefore,duly embellished the doorpost down below; and, as the afternoon shadowsdeepened, the owner of that name himself appeared, from overlooking a painterwhom Doctor Manette had employed to add to the list the name of CharlesEvremonde, called Darnay.            

In the universal fear and distrust that darkened the time, all the usualharmless ways of life were changed. In the Doctorís little household, as in verymany others, the articles of daily consumption that were wanted were purchasedevery evening, in small quantities and at various small shops. To avoidattracting notice, and to give as little occasion as possible for talk and envy,was the general desire.            

For some months past, Miss Pross and Mr. Cruncher had discharged the office ofpurveyors; the former carrying the money; the latter, the basket. Everyafternoon at about the time when the public lamps were lighted, they fared forthon this duty, and made and brought home such purchases as were needful. AlthoughMiss Pross, through her long association with a French family, might have knownas much of their language as of her own, if she had had a mind, she had no mindin that direction; consequently she knew no more of that ìnonsenseî (as she waspleased to call it) than Mr. Cruncher did. So her manner of marketing was toplump a noun-substantive at the head of a shopkeeper without any introduction inthe nature of an article, and, if it happened not to be the name of the thingshe wanted, to look round for that thing, lay hold of it, and hold on by ituntil the bargain was concluded. She always made a bargain for it, by holdingup, as a statement of its just price, one finger less than the merchant held up,whatever his number might be.            

ìNow, Mr. Cruncher,î said Miss Pross, whose eyes were red with felicity; ìifyou are ready, I am.î            

Jerry hoarsely professed himself at Miss Prossís service. He had worn all hisrust off long ago, but nothing would file his spiky head down.            

ìThereís all manner of things wanted,î said Miss Pross, ìand we shall have aprecious time of it. We want wine, among the rest. Nice toasts these Redheadswill be drinking, wherever we buy it.î            

ìIt will be much the same to your knowledge, miss, I should think,î retortedJerry, ìwhether they drink your health or the Old Unís.î            

ìWhoís he?î said Miss Pross.            

Mr. Cruncher, with some diffidence, explained himself as meaning ìOldNickís.î            

ìHa!î said Miss Pross, ìit doesnít need an interpreter to explain the meaningof these creatures. They have but one, and itís Midnight Murder, andMischief.î            

ìHush, dear! Pray, pray, be cautious!î cried Lucie.            

ìYes, yes, yes, Iíll be cautious,î said Miss Pross; ìbut I may say amongourselves, that I do hope there will be no oniony and tobaccoey smotherings inthe form of embracings all round, going on in the streets. Now, Ladybird, neveryou stir from that fire till I come back! Take care of the dear husband you haverecovered, and donít move your pretty head from his shoulder as you have it now,till you see me again! May I ask a question, Doctor Manette, before Igo?î            

ìI think you may take that liberty,î the Doctor answered, smiling.            

ìFor gracious sake, donít talk about Liberty; we have quite enough of that,îsaid Miss Pross.            

ìHush, dear! Again?î Lucie remonstrated.            

ìWell, my sweet,î said Miss Pross, nodding her head emphatically, ìthe shortand the long of it is, that I am a subject of His Most Gracious Majesty KingGeorge the Third;î Miss Pross curtseyed at the name; ìand as such, my maxim is,Confound their politics, Frustrate their knavish tricks, On him our hopes wefix, God save the King!î            

Mr. Cruncher, in an access of loyalty, growlingly repeated the words afterMiss Pross, like somebody at church.            

ìI am glad you have so much of the Englishman in you, though I wish you hadnever taken that cold in your voice,î said Miss Pross, approvingly. ìBut thequestion, Doctor Manette. Is thereî óit was the good creatureís way to affect tomake light of anything that was a great anxiety with them all, and to come at itin this chance manneróìis there any prospect yet, of our getting out of thisplace?î            

ìI fear not yet. It would be dangerous for Charles yet.î            

ìHeigh-ho-hum!î said Miss Pross, cheerfully repressing a sigh as she glancedat her darlingís golden hair in the light of the fire, ìthen we must havepatience and wait: thatís all. We must hold up our heads and fight low, as mybrother Solomon used to say. Now, Mr. Cruncher! óDonít you move,Ladybird!î            

They went out, leaving Lucie, and her husband, her father, and the child, by abright fire. Mr. Lorry was expected back presently from the Banking House. MissPross had lighted the lamp, but had put it aside in a corner, that they mightenjoy the fire-light undisturbed. Little Lucie sat by her grandfather with herhands clasped through his arm: and he, in a tone not rising much above awhisper, began to tell her a story of a great and powerful Fairy who had openeda prison-wall and let out a captive who had once done the Fairy a service. Allwas subdued and quiet, and Lucie was more at ease than she had been.            

ìWhat is that?î she cried, all at once.            

ìMy dear!î said her father, stopping in his story, and laying his hand onhers, ìcommand yourself. What a disordered state you are in! The leastthingónothingóstartles you! YOU, your fatherís daughter!î            

ìI thought, my father,î said Lucie, excusing herself, with a pale face and ina faltering voice, ìthat I heard strange feet upon the stairs.î            

ìMy love, the staircase is as still as Death.î As he said the word, a blow wasstruck upon the door.            

ìOh father, father. What can this be! Hide Charles. Save him!î            

ìMy child,î said the Doctor, rising, and laying his hand upon her shoulder, ìIHAVE saved him. What weakness is this, my dear! Let me go to the door.î            

He took the lamp in his hand, crossed the two intervening outer rooms, andopened it. A rude clattering of feet over the floor, and four rough men in redcaps, armed with sabres and pistols, entered the room.            

ìThe Citizen Evremonde, called Darnay,î said the first.            

ìWho seeks him?î answered Darnay.            

ìI seek him. We seek him. I know you, Evremonde; I saw you before the Tribunalto-day. You are again the prisoner of the Republic.î            

The four surrounded him, where he stood with his wife and child clinging tohim.            

ìTell me how and why am I again a prisoner?î            

ìIt is enough that you return straight to the Conciergerie, and will knowto-morrow. You are summoned for to-morrow.î            

Doctor Manette, whom this visitation had so turned into stone, that he stoodwith the lamp in his hand, as if be woe a statue made to hold it, moved afterthese words were spoken, put the lamp down, and confronting the speaker, andtaking him, not ungently, by the loose front of his red woollen shirt,said:            

ìYou know him, you have said. Do you know me?î            

ìYes, I know you, Citizen Doctor.î            

ìWe all know you, Citizen Doctor,î said the other three.            

He looked abstractedly from one to another, and said, in a lower voice, aftera pause:            

ìWill you answer his question to me then? How does this happen?î            

ìCitizen Doctor,î said the first, reluctantly, ìhe has been denounced to theSection of Saint Antoine. This citizen,î pointing out the second who hadentered, ìis from Saint Antoine.î            

The citizen here indicated nodded his head, and added:            

ìHe is accused by Saint Antoine.î            

ìOf what?î asked the Doctor.            

ìCitizen Doctor,î said the first, with his former reluctance, ìask no more. Ifthe Republic demands sacrifices from you, without doubt you as a good patriotwill be happy to make them. The Republic goes before all. The People is supreme.Evremonde, we are pressed.î            

ìOne word,î the Doctor entreated. ìWill you tell me who denounced him?î            

ìIt is against rule,î answered the first; ìbut you can ask Him of SaintAntoine here.î            

The Doctor turned his eyes upon that man. Who moved uneasily on his feet,rubbed his beard a little, and at length said:            

ìWell! Truly it is against rule. But he is denouncedóand gravelyóby theCitizen and Citizeness Defarge. And by one other.î            

ìWhat other?î            

ìDo YOU ask, Citizen Doctor?î            

ìYes.î            

ìThen,î said he of Saint Antoine, with a strange look, ìyou will be answeredto-morrow. Now, I am dumb!î            

Happily unconscious of the new calamity at home, Miss Pross threaded her wayalong the narrow streets and crossed the river by the bridge of the Pont-Neuf,reckoning in her mind the number of indispensable purchases she had to make. Mr.Cruncher, with the basket, walked at her side. They both looked to the right andto the left into most of the shops they passed, had a wary eye for allgregarious assemblages of people, and turned out of their road to avoid any veryexcited group of talkers. It was a raw evening, and the misty river, blurred tothe eye with blazing lights and to the ear with harsh noises, showed where thebarges were stationed in which the smiths worked, making guns for the Army ofthe Republic. Woe to the man who played tricks with THAT Army, or got undeservedpromotion in it! Better for him that his beard had never grown, for the NationalRazor shaved him close.            

Having purchased a few small articles of grocery, and a measure of oil for thelamp, Miss Pross bethought herself of the wine they wanted. After peeping intoseveral wine-shops, she stopped at the sign of the Good Republican Brutus ofAntiquity, not far from the National Palace, once (and twice) the Tuileries,where the aspect of things rather took her fancy. It had a quieter look than anyother place of the same description they had passed, and, though red withpatriotic caps, was not so red as the rest. Sounding Mr. Cruncher, and findinghim of her opinion, Miss Pross resorted to the Good Republican Brutus ofAntiquity, attended by her cavalier.            

Slightly observant of the smoky lights; of the people, pipe in mouth, playingwith limp cards and yellow dominoes; of the one bare- breasted, bare-armed,soot-begrimed workman reading a journal aloud, and of the others listening tohim; of the weapons worn, or laid aside to be resumed; of the two or threecustomers fallen forward asleep, who in the popular high-shouldered shaggy blackspencer looked, in that attitude, like slumbering bears or dogs; the twooutlandish customers approached the counter, and showed what they wanted.            

As their wine was measuring out, a man parted from another man in a corner,and rose to depart. In going, he had to face Miss Pross. No sooner did he faceher, than Miss Pross uttered a scream, and clapped her hands.            

In a moment, the whole company were on their feet. That somebody wasassassinated by somebody vindicating a difference of opinion was the likeliestoccurrence. Everybody looked to see somebody fall, but only saw a man and awoman standing staring at each other; the man with all the outward aspect of aFrenchman and a thorough Republican; the woman, evidently English.            

What was said in this disappointing anti-climax, by the disciples of the GoodRepublican Brutus of Antiquity, except that it was something very voluble andloud, would have been as so much Hebrew or Chaldean to Miss Pross and herprotector, though they had been all ears. But, they had no ears for anything intheir surprise. For, it must be recorded, that not only was Miss Pross lost inamazement and agitation, but, Mr. Cruncheróthough it seemed on his own separateand individual accountówas in a state of the greatest wonder.            

ìWhat is the matter?î said the man who had caused Miss Pross to scream;speaking in a vexed, abrupt voice (though in a low tone), and in English.            

ìOh, Solomon, dear Solomon!î cried Miss Pross, clapping her hands again.ìAfter not setting eyes upon you or hearing of you for so long a time, do I findyou here!î            

ìDonít call me Solomon. Do you want to be the death of me?î asked the man, ina furtive, frightened way.            

ìBrother, brother!î cried Miss Pross, bursting into tears. ìHave I ever beenso hard with you that you ask me such a cruel question?î            

ìThen hold your meddlesome tongue,î said Solomon, ìand come out, if you wantto speak to me. Pay for your wine, and come out. Whoís this man?î            

Miss Pross, shaking her loving and dejected head at her by no meansaffectionate brother, said through her tears, ìMr. Cruncher.î            

ìLet him come out too,î said Solomon. ìDoes he think me a ghost?î            

Apparently, Mr. Cruncher did, to judge from his looks. He said not a word,however, and Miss Pross, exploring the depths of her reticule through her tearswith great difficulty paid for her wine. As she did so, Solomon turned to thefollowers of the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, and offered a few words ofexplanation in the French language, which caused them all to relapse into theirformer places and pursuits.            

ìNow,î said Solomon, stopping at the dark street corner, ìwhat do youwant?î            

ìHow dreadfully unkind in a brother nothing has ever turned my love awayfrom!î cried Miss Pross, ìto give me such a greeting, and show me noaffection.î            

ìThere. Confound it! There,î said Solomon, making a dab at Miss Prossís lipswith his own. ìNow are you content?î            

Miss Pross only shook her head and wept in silence.            

ìIf you expect me to be surprised,î said her brother Solomon, ìI am notsurprised; I knew you were here; I know of most people who are here. If youreally donít want to endanger my existenceówhich I half believe you doógo yourways as soon as possible, and let me go mine. I am busy. I am anofficial.î            

ìMy English brother Solomon,î mourned Miss Pross, casting up her tear-fraughteyes, ìthat had the makings in him of one of the best and greatest of men in hisnative country, an official among foreigners, and such foreigners! I wouldalmost sooner have seen the dear boy lying in hisóî            

ìI said so!î cried her brother, interrupting. ìI knew it. You want to be thedeath of me. I shall be rendered Suspected, by my own sister. Just as I amgetting on!î            

ìThe gracious and merciful Heavens forbid!î cried Miss Pross. ìFar ratherwould I never see you again, dear Solomon, though I have ever loved you truly,and ever shall. Say but one affectionate word to me, and tell me there isnothing angry or estranged between us, and I will detain you no longer.î            

Good Miss Pross! As if the estrangement between them had come of anyculpability of hers. As if Mr. Lorry had not known it for a fact, years ago, inthe quiet corner in Soho, that this precious brother had spent her money andleft her!            

He was saying the affectionate word, however, with a far more grudgingcondescension and patronage than he could have shown if their relative meritsand positions had been reversed (which is invariably the case, all the worldover), when Mr. Cruncher, touching him on the shoulder, hoarsely andunexpectedly interposed with the following singular question:            

ìI say! Might I ask the favour? As to whether your name is John Solomon, orSolomon John?î            

The official turned towards him with sudden distrust. He had not previouslyuttered a word.            

ìCome!î said Mr. Cruncher. ìSpeak out, you know.î (Which, by the way, was morethan he could do himself.) ìJohn Solomon, or Solomon John? She calls youSolomon, and she must know, being your sister. And I knowyouíre John, you know. Which of the two goes first? And regarding that name ofPross, likewise. That warnít your name over the water.î            

ìWhat do you mean?î            

ìWell, I donít know all I mean, for I canít call to mind what your name was,over the water.î            

ìNo?î            

ìNo. But Iíll swear it was a name of two syllables.î            

ìIndeed?î            

ìYes. Tíother oneís was one syllable. I know you. You was a spyówitness at theBailey. What, in the name of the Father of Lies, own father to yourself, was youcalled at that time?î            

ìBarsad,î said another voice, striking in.            

ìThatís the name for a thousand pound!î cried Jerry.            

The speaker who struck in, was Sydney Carton. He had his hands behind himunder the skirts of his riding-coat, and he stood at Mr. Cruncherís elbow asnegligently as he might have stood at the Old Bailey itself.            

ìDonít be alarmed, my dear Miss Pross. I arrived at Mr. Lorryís, to hissurprise, yesterday evening; we agreed that I would not present myself elsewhereuntil all was well, or unless I could be useful; I present myself here, to beg alittle talk with your brother. I wish you had a better employed brother than Mr.Barsad. I wish for your sake Mr. Barsad was not a Sheep of the Prisons.î            

Sheep was a cant word of the time for a spy, under the gaolers. The spy, whowas pale, turned paler, and asked him how he daredó            

ìIíll tell you,î said Sydney. ìI lighted on you, Mr. Barsad, coming out of theprison of the Conciergerie while I was contemplating the walls, an hour or moreago. You have a face to be remembered, and I remember faces well. Made curiousby seeing you in that connection, and having a reason, to which you are nostranger, for associating you with the misfortunes of a friend now veryunfortunate, I walked in your direction. I walked into the wine-shop here, closeafter you, and sat near you. I had no difficulty in deducing from yourunreserved conversation, and the rumour openly going about among your admirers,the nature of your calling. And gradually, what I had done at random, seemed toshape itself into a purpose, Mr. Barsad.î            

ìWhat purpose?î the spy asked.            

ìIt would be troublesome, and might be dangerous, to explain in the street.Could you favour me, in confidence, with some minutes of your companyóat theoffice of Tellsonís Bank, for instance?î            

ìUnder a threat?î            

ìOh! Did I say that?î            

ìThen, why should I go there?î            

ìReally, Mr. Barsad, I canít say, if you canít.î            

ìDo you mean that you wonít say, sir?î the spy irresolutely asked.            

ìYou apprehend me very clearly, Mr. Barsad. I wonít.î            

Cartonís negligent recklessness of manner came powerfully in aid of hisquickness and skill, in such a business as he had in his secret mind, and withsuch a man as he had to do with. His practised eye saw it, and made the most ofit.            

ìNow, I told you so,î said the spy, casting a reproachful look at his sister;ìif any trouble comes of this, itís your doing.î            

ìCome, come, Mr. Barsad!î exclaimed Sydney. ìDonít be ungrateful. But for mygreat respect for your sister, I might not have led up so pleasantly to a littleproposal that I wish to make for our mutual satisfaction. Do you go with me tothe Bank?î            

ìIíll hear what you have got to say. Yes, Iíll go with you.î            

ìI propose that we first conduct your sister safely to the corner of her ownstreet. Let me take your arm, Miss Pross. This is not a good city, at this time,for you to be out in, unprotected; and as your escort knows Mr. Barsad, I willinvite him to Mr. Lorryís with us. Are we ready? Come then!î            

Miss Pross recalled soon afterwards, and to the end of her life remembered,that as she pressed her hands on Sydneyís arm and looked up in his face,imploring him to do no hurt to Solomon, there was a braced purpose in the armand a kind of inspiration in the eyes, which not only contradicted his lightmanner, but changed and raised the man. She was too much occupied then withfears for the brother who so little deserved her affection, and with Sydneyísfriendly reassurances, adequately to heed what she observed.            

They left her at the corner of the street, and Carton led the way to Mr.Lorryís, which was within a few minutesí walk. John Barsad, or Solomon Pross,walked at his side.            

Mr. Lorry had just finished his dinner, and was sitting before a cheery littlelog or two of fireóperhaps looking into their blaze for the picture of thatyounger elderly gentleman from Tellsonís, who had looked into the red coals atthe Royal George at Dover, now a good many years ago. He turned his head as theyentered, and showed the surprise with which he saw a stranger.            

ìMiss Prossís brother, sir,î said Sydney. ìMr. Barsad.î            

ìBarsad?î repeated the old gentleman, ìBarsad? I have an association with thenameóand with the face.î            

ìI told you you had a remarkable face, Mr. Barsad,î observed Carton, coolly.ìPray sit down.î            

As he took a chair himself, he supplied the link that Mr. Lorry wanted, bysaying to him with a frown, ìWitness at that trial.î Mr. Lorry immediatelyremembered, and regarded his new visitor with an undisguised look ofabhorrence.            

ìMr. Barsad has been recognised by Miss Pross as the affectionate brother youhave heard of,î said Sydney, ìand has acknowledged the relationship. I pass toworse news. Darnay has been arrested again.î            

Struck with consternation, the old gentleman exclaimed, ìWhat do you tell me!I left him safe and free within these two hours, and am about to return tohim!î            

ìArrested for all that. When was it done, Mr. Barsad?î            

ìJust now, if at all.î            

ìMr. Barsad is the best authority possible, sir,î said Sydney, ìand I have itfrom Mr. Barsadís communication to a friend and brother Sheep over a bottle ofwine, that the arrest has taken place. He left the messengers at the gate, andsaw them admitted by the porter. There is no earthly doubt that he isretaken.î            

Mr. Lorryís business eye read in the speakerís face that it was loss of timeto dwell upon the point. Confused, but sensible that something might depend onhis presence of mind, he commanded himself, and was silently attentive.            

ìNow, I trust,î said Sydney to him, ìthat the name and influence of DoctorManette may stand him in as good stead to-morrowóyou said he would be before theTribunal again to-morrow, Mr. Barsad? óî            

ìYes; I believe so.î            

ìóIn as good stead to-morrow as to-day. But it may not be so. I own to you, Iam shaken, Mr. Lorry, by Doctor Manetteís not having had the power to preventthis arrest.î            

ìHe may not have known of it beforehand,î said Mr. Lorry.            

ìBut that very circumstance would be alarming, when we remember how identifiedhe is with his son-in-law.î            

ìThatís true,î Mr. Lorry acknowledged, with his troubled hand at his chin, andhis troubled eyes on Carton.            

ìIn short,î said Sydney, ìthis is a desperate time, when desperate games areplayed for desperate stakes. Let the Doctor play the winning game; I will playthe losing one. No manís life here is worth purchase. Any one carried home bythe people to-day, may be condemned tomorrow. Now, the stake I have resolved toplay for, in case of the worst, is a friend in the Conciergerie. And the friendI purpose to myself to win, is Mr. Barsad.î            

ìYou need have good cards, sir,î said the spy.            

ìIíll run them over. Iíll see what I hold, óMr. Lorry, you know what a brute Iam; I wish youíd give me a little brandy.î            

It was put before him, and he drank off a glassfulódrank off anotherglassfulópushed the bottle thoughtfully away.            

ìMr. Barsad,î he went on, in the tone of one who really was looking over ahand at cards: ìSheep of the prisons, emissary of Republican committees, nowturnkey, now prisoner, always spy and secret informer, so much the more valuablehere for being English that an Englishman is less open to suspicion ofsubornation in those characters than a Frenchman, represents himself to hisemployers under a false name. Thatís a very good card. Mr. Barsad, now in theemploy of the republican French government, was formerly in the employ of thearistocratic English government, the enemy of France and freedom. Thatís anexcellent card. Inference clear as day in this region of suspicion, that Mr.Barsad, still in the pay of the aristocratic English government, is the spy ofPitt, the treacherous foe of the Republic crouching in its bosom, the Englishtraitor and agent of all mischief so much spoken of and so difficult to find.Thatís a card not to be beaten. Have you followed my hand, Mr. Barsad?î            

ìNot to understand your play,î returned the spy, somewhat uneasily.            

ìI play my Ace, Denunciation of Mr. Barsad to the nearest Section Committee.Look over your hand, Mr. Barsad, and see what you have. Donít hurry.î            

He drew the bottle near, poured out another glassful of brandy, and drank itoff. He saw that the spy was fearful of his drinking himself into a fit statefor the immediate denunciation of him. Seeing it, he poured out and drankanother glassful.            

ìLook over your hand carefully, Mr. Barsad. Take time.î            

It was a poorer hand than he suspected. Mr. Barsad saw losing cards in it thatSydney Carton knew nothing of. Thrown out of his honourable employment inEngland, through too much unsuccessful hard swearing thereónot because he wasnot wanted there; our English reasons for vaunting our superiority to secrecyand spies are of very modern dateóhe knew that he had crossed the Channel, andaccepted service in France: first, as a tempter and an eavesdropper among hisown countrymen there: gradually, as a tempter and an eavesdropper among thenatives. He knew that under the overthrown government he had been a spy uponSaint Antoine and Defargeís wine-shop; had received from the watchful policesuch heads of information concerning Doctor Manetteís imprisonment, release, andhistory, as should serve him for an introduction to familiar conversation withthe Defarges; and tried them on Madame Defarge, and had broken down with themsignally. He always remembered with fear and trembling, that that terrible womanhad knitted when he talked with her, and had looked ominously at him as herfingers moved. He had since seen her, in the Section of Saint Antoine, over andover again produce her knitted registers, and denounce people whose lives theguillotine then surely swallowed up. He knew, as every one employed as he wasdid, that he was never safe; that flight was impossible; that he was tied fastunder the shadow of the axe; and that in spite of his utmost tergiversation andtreachery in furtherance of the reigning terror, a word might bring it down uponhim. Once denounced, and on such grave grounds as had just now been suggested tohis mind, he foresaw that the dreadful woman of whose unrelenting character hehad seen many proofs, would produce against him that fatal register, and wouldquash his last chance of life. Besides that all secret men are men soonterrified, here were surely cards enough of one black suit, to justify theholder in growing rather livid as he turned them over.            

ìYou scarcely seem to like your hand,î said Sydney, with the greatestcomposure. ìDo you play?î            

ìI think, sir,î said the spy, in the meanest manner, as he turned to Mr.Lorry, ìI may appeal to a gentleman of your years and benevolence, to put it tothis other gentleman, so much your junior, whether he can under anycircumstances reconcile it to his station to play that Ace of which he hasspoken. I admit that I am a spy, and that it is considered adiscreditable stationóthough it must be filled by somebody; but this gentlemanis no spy, and why should he so demean himself as to make himself one?î            

ìI play my Ace, Mr. Barsad,î said Carton, taking the answer on himself, andlooking at his watch, ìwithout any scruple, in a very few minutes.î            

ìI should have hoped, gentlemen both,î said the spy, always striving to hookMr. Lorry into the discussion, ìthat your respect for my sisteróî            

ìI could not better testify my respect for your sister than by finallyrelieving her of her brother,î said Sydney Carton.            

ìYou think not, sir?î            

ìI have thoroughly made up my mind about it.î            

The smooth manner of the spy, curiously in dissonance with his ostentatiouslyrough dress, and probably with his usual demeanour, received such a check fromthe inscrutability of Carton, ówho was a mystery to wiser and honester men thanhe, óthat it faltered here and failed him. While he was at a loss, Carton said,resuming his former air of contemplating cards:            

ìAnd indeed, now I think again, I have a strong impression that I have anothergood card here, not yet enumerated. That friend and fellow-Sheep, who spoke ofhimself as pasturing in the country prisons; who was he?î            

ìFrench. You donít know him,î said the spy, quickly.            

ìFrench, eh?î repeated Carton, musing, and not appearing to notice him at all,though he echoed his word. ìWell; he may be.î            

ìIs, I assure you,î said the spy; ìthough itís not important.î            

ìThough itís not important,î repeated Carton, in the same mechanicalwayóìthough itís not importantóNo, itís not important. No. Yet I know theface.î            

ìI think not. I am sure not. It canít be,î said the spy.            

ìIt-canít-be,î muttered Sydney Carton, retrospectively, and idling his glass(which fortunately was a small one) again. ìCanít-be. Spoke good French. Yetlike a foreigner, I thought?î            

ìProvincial,î said the spy.            

ìNo. Foreign!î cried Carton, striking his open hand on the table, as a lightbroke clearly on his mind. ìCly! Disguised, but the same man. We had that manbefore us at the Old Bailey.î            

ìNow, there you are hasty, sir,î said Barsad, with a smile that gave hisaquiline nose an extra inclination to one side; ìthere you really give me anadvantage over you. Cly (who I will unreservedly admit, at this distance oftime, was a partner of mine) has been dead several years. I attended him in hislast illness. He was buried in London, at the church of SaintPancras-in-the-Fields. His unpopularity with the blackguard multitude at themoment prevented my following his remains, but I helped to lay him in hiscoffin.î            

Here, Mr. Lorry became aware, from where he sat, of a most remarkable goblinshadow on the wall. Tracing it to its source, he discovered it to be caused by asudden extraordinary rising and stiffening of all the risen and stiff hair onMr. Cruncherís head.            

ìLet us be reasonable,î said the spy, ìand let us be fair. To show you howmistaken you are, and what an unfounded assumption yours is, I will lay beforeyou a certificate of Clyís burial, which I happened to have carried in mypocket-book,î with a hurried hand he produced and opened it, ìever since. Thereit is. Oh, look at it, look at it! You may take it in your hand; itís noforgery.î            

Here, Mr. Lorry perceived the reflection on the wall to elongate, and Mr.Cruncher rose and stepped forward. His hair could not have been more violentlyon end, if it had been that moment dressed by the Cow with the crumpled horn inthe house that Jack built.            

Unseen by the spy, Mr. Cruncher stood at his side, and touched him on theshoulder like a ghostly bailiff.            

ìThat there Roger Cly, master,î said Mr. Cruncher, with a taciturn andiron-bound visage. ìSo YOU put him in his coffin?î            

ìI did.î            

ìWho took him out of it?î            

Barsad leaned back in his chair, and stammered, ìWhat do you mean?î            

ìI mean,î said Mr. Cruncher, ìthat he warnít never in it. No! Not he! Iíllhave my head took off, if he was ever in it.î            

The spy looked round at the two gentlemen; they both looked in unspeakableastonishment at Jerry.            

ìI tell you,î said Jerry, ìthat you buried paving-stones and earth in thatthere coffin. Donít go and tell me that you buried Cly. It was a take in. Me andtwo more knows it.î            

ìHow do you know it?î            

ìWhatís that to you? Ecod!î growled Mr. Cruncher, ìitís you I have got a oldgrudge again, is it, with your shameful impositions upon tradesmen! Iíd catchhold of your throat and choke you for half a guinea.î            

Sydney Carton, who, with Mr. Lorry, had been lost in amazement at this turn ofthe business, here requested Mr. Cruncher to moderate and explainhimself.            

ìAt another time, sir,î he returned, evasively, ìthe present time isill-conwenient for explaininí. What I stand to, is, that he knows well wot thatthere Cly was never in that there coffin. Let him say he was, in so much as aword of one syllable, and Iíll either catch hold of his throat and choke him forhalf a guinea;î Mr. Cruncher dwelt upon this as quite a liberal offer; ìor Iíllout and announce him.î            

ìHumph! I see one thing,î said Carton. ìI hold another card, Mr. Barsad.Impossible, here in raging Paris, with Suspicion filling the air, for you tooutlive denunciation, when you are in communication with another aristocraticspy of the same antecedents as yourself, who, moreover, has the mystery abouthim of having feigned death and come to life again! A plot in the prisons, ofthe foreigner against the Republic. A strong cardóa certain Guillotine card! Doyou play?î            

ìNo!î returned the spy. ìI throw up. I confess that we were so unpopular withthe outrageous mob, that I only got away from England at the risk of beingducked to death, and that Cly was so ferreted up and down, that he never wouldhave got away at all but for that sham. Though how this man knows it was a sham,is a wonder of wonders to me.î            

ìNever you trouble your head about this man,î retorted the contentious Mr.Cruncher; ìyouíll have trouble enough with giving your attention to thatgentleman. And look here! Once more!î óMr. Cruncher could not be restrained frommaking rather an ostentatious parade of his liberalityóîIíd catch hold of yourthroat and choke you for half a guinea.î            

The Sheep of the prisons turned from him to Sydney Carton, and said, with moredecision, ìIt has come to a point. I go on duty soon, and canít overstay mytime. You told me you had a proposal; what is it? Now, it is of no use askingtoo much of me. Ask me to do anything in my office, putting my head in greatextra danger, and I had better trust my life to the chances of a refusal thanthe chances of consent. In short, I should make that choice. You talk ofdesperation. We are all desperate here. Remember! I may denounce you if I thinkproper, and I can swear my way through stone walls, and so can others. Now, whatdo you want with me?î            

ìNot very much. You are a turnkey at the Conciergerie?î            

ìI tell you once for all, there is no such thing as an escape possible,î saidthe spy, firmly.            

ìWhy need you tell me what I have not asked? You are a turnkey at theConciergerie?î            

ìI am sometimes.î            

ìYou can be when you choose?î            

ìI can pass in and out when I choose.î            

Sydney Carton filled another glass with brandy, poured it slowly out upon thehearth, and watched it as it dropped. It being all spent, he said,rising:            

ìSo far, we have spoken before these two, because it was as well that themerits of the cards should not rest solely between you and me. Come into thedark room here, and let us have one final word alone.î            

While Sydney Carton and the Sheep of the prisons were in the adjoining darkroom, speaking so low that not a sound was heard, Mr. Lorry looked at Jerry inconsiderable doubt and mistrust. That honest tradesmanís manner of receiving thelook, did not inspire confidence; he changed the leg on which he rested, asoften as if he had fifty of those limbs, and were trying them all; he examinedhis finger-nails with a very questionable closeness of attention; and wheneverMr. Lorryís eye caught his, he was taken with that peculiar kind of short coughrequiring the hollow of a hand before it, which is seldom, if ever, known to bean infirmity attendant on perfect openness of character.            

ìJerry,î said Mr. Lorry. ìCome here.î            

Mr. Cruncher came forward sideways, with one of his shoulders in advance ofhim.            

ìWhat have you been, besides a messenger?î            

After some cogitation, accompanied with an intent look at his patron, Mr.Cruncher conceived the luminous idea of replying, ìAgicultooralcharacter.î            

ìMy mind misgives me much,î said Mr. Lorry, angrily shaking a forefinger athim, ìthat you have used the respectable and great house of Tellsonís as ablind, and that you have had an unlawful occupation of an infamous description.If you have, donít expect me to befriend you when you get back to England. Ifyou have, donít expect me to keep your secret. Tellsonís shall not be imposedupon.î            

ìI hope, sir,î pleaded the abashed Mr. Cruncher, ìthat a gentleman likeyourself wot Iíve had the honour of odd jobbing till Iím grey at it, would thinktwice about harming of me, even if it wos soóI donít say it is, but even if itwos. And which it is to be took into account that if it wos, it wouldnít, eventhen, be all oí one side. Thereíd be two sides to it. There might be medicaldoctors at the present hour, a picking up their guineas where a honest tradesmandonít pick up his fardensófardens! no, nor yet his half fardensóhalf fardens!no, nor yet his quarteróa banking away like smoke at Tellsonís, and a cockingtheir medical eyes at that tradesman on the sly, a going in and going out totheir own carriagesóah! Equally like smoke, if not more so. Well, that ëud beimposing, too, on Tellsonís. For you cannot sarse the goose and not the gander.And hereís Mrs. Cruncher, or leastways wos in the Old England times, and wouldbe to-morrow, if cause given, a floppiní again the business to that degree as isruinatingóstark ruinating! Whereas them medical doctorsí wives donít flopócatchëem at it! Or, if they flop, their toppings goes in favour of more patients, andhow can you rightly have one without tíother? Then, wot with undertakers, andwot with parish clerks, and wot with sextons, and wot with private watchmen (allawaricious and all in it), a man wouldnít get much by it, even if it wos so. Andwot little a man did get, would never prosper with him, Mr. Lorry. Heíd neverhave no good of it; heíd want all along to be out of the line, if he, could seehis way out, being once inóeven if it wos so.î            

ìUgh!î cried Mr. Lorry, rather relenting, nevertheless, ìI am shocked at thesight of you.î            

ìNow, what I would humbly offer to you, sir,î pursued Mr. Cruncher, ìeven ifit wos so, which I donít say it isóî            

ìDonít prevaricate,î said Mr. Lorry.            

ìNo, I will NOT, sir,î returned Mr. Crunches as if nothing were further fromhis thoughts or practiceóîwhich I donít say it isówot I would humbly offer toyou, sir, would be this. Upon that there stool, at that there Bar, sets thatthere boy of mine, brought up and growed up to be a man, wot will errand you,message you, general-light-job you, till your heels is where your head is, ifsuch should be your wishes. If it wos so, which I still donít say it is (for Iwill not prewaricate to you, sir), let that there boy keep his fatherís place,and take care of his mother; donít blow upon that boyís fatheródo not do it,siróand let that father go into the line of the regílar digginí, and make amendsfor what he would have undugóif it wos soóby digginí of ëem in with a will, andwith conwictions respectiní the futurí keepiní of ëem safe. That, Mr. Lorry,îsaid Mr. Cruncher, wiping his forehead with his arm, as an announcement that hehad arrived at the peroration of his discourse, ìis wot I would respectfullyoffer to you, sir. A man donít see all this here a goiní on dreadful round him,in the way of Subjects without heads, dear me, plentiful enough fur to bring theprice down to porterage and hardly that, without haviní his serious thoughts ofthings. And these here would be mine, if it wos so, entreatiní of you fur tobear in mind that wot I said just now, I up and said in the good cause when Imight have kepí it back.î            

ìThat at least is true,î said Mr. Lorry. ìSay no more now. It may be that Ishall yet stand your friend, if you deserve it, and repent in actionónot inwords. I want no more words.î            

Mr. Cruncher knuckled his forehead, as Sydney Carton and the spy returned fromthe dark room. ìAdieu, Mr. Barsad,î said the former; ìour arrangement thus made,you have nothing to fear from me.î            

He sat down in a chair on the hearth, over against Mr. Lorry. When they werealone, Mr. Lorry asked him what he had done?            

ìNot much. If it should go ill with the prisoner, I have ensured access tohim, once.î            

Mr. Lorryís countenance fell.            

ìIt is all I could do,î said Carton. ìTo propose too much, would be to putthis manís head under the axe, and, as he himself said, nothing worse couldhappen to him if he were denounced. It was obviously the weakness of theposition. There is no help for it.î            

ìBut access to him,î said Mr. Lorry, ìif it should go ill before the Tribunal,will not save him.î            

ìI never said it would.î            

Mr. Lorryís eyes gradually sought the fire; his sympathy with his darling, andthe heavy disappointment of his second arrest, gradually weakened them; he wasan old man now, overborne with anxiety of late, and his tears fell.            

ìYou are a good man and a true friend,î said Carton, in an altered voice.ìForgive me if I notice that you are affected. I could not see my father weep,and sit by, careless. And I could not respect your sorrow more, if you were myfather. You are free from that misfortune, however.î            

Though he said the last words, with a slip into his usual manner, there was atrue feeling and respect both in his tone and in his touch, that Mr. Lorry, whohad never seen the better side of him, was wholly unprepared for. He gave himhis hand, and Carton gently pressed it.            

ìTo return to poor Darnay,î said Carton. ìDonít tell Her of this interview, orthis arrangement. It would not enable Her to go to see him. She might think itwas contrived, in case of the worse, to convey to him the means of anticipatingthe sentence.î            

Mr. Lorry had not thought of that, and he looked quickly at Carton to see ifit were in his mind. It seemed to be; he returned the look, and evidentlyunderstood it.            

ìShe might think a thousand things,î Carton said, ìand any of them would onlyadd to her trouble. Donít speak of me to her. As I said to you when I firstcame, I had better not see her. I can put my hand out, to do any little helpfulwork for her that my hand can find to do, without that. You are going to her, Ihope? She must be very desolate to-night.î            

ìI am going now, directly.î            

ìI am glad of that. She has such a strong attachment to you and reliance onyou. How does she look?î            

ìAnxious and unhappy, but very beautiful.î            

ìAh!î            

It was a long, grieving sound, like a sighóalmost like a sob. It attracted Mr.Lorryís eyes to Cartonís face, which was turned to the fire. A light, or a shade(the old gentleman could not have said which), passed from it as swiftly as achange will sweep over a hill-side on a wild bright day, and he lifted his footto put back one of the little flaming logs, which was tumbling forward. He worethe white riding-coat and top-boots, then in vogue, and the light of the firetouching their light surfaces made him look very pale, with his long brown hair,all untrimmed, hanging loose about him. His indifference to fire wassufficiently remarkable to elicit a word of remonstrance from Mr. Lorry; hisboot was still upon the hot embers of the flaming log, when it had broken underthe weight of his foot.            

ìI forgot it,î he said.            

Mr. Lorryís eyes were again attracted to his face. Taking note of the wastedair which clouded the naturally handsome features, and having the expression ofprisonersí faces fresh in his mind, he was strongly reminded of thatexpression.            

ìAnd your duties here have drawn to an end, sir?î said Carton, turning tohim.            

ìYes. As I was telling you last night when Lucie came in so unexpectedly, Ihave at length done all that I can do here. I hoped to have left them in perfectsafety, and then to have quitted Paris. I have my Leave to Pass. I was ready togo.î            

They were both silent.            

ìYours is a long life to look back upon, sir?î said Carton, wistfully.            

ìI am in my seventy-eighth year.î            

ìYou have been useful all your life; steadily and constantly occupied;trusted, respected, and looked up to?î            

ìI have been a man of business, ever since I have been a man. Indeed, I maysay that I was a man of business when a boy.î            

ìSee what a place you fill at seventy-eight. How many people will miss youwhen you leave it empty!î            

ìA solitary old bachelor,î answered Mr. Lorry, shaking his head. ìThere isnobody to weep for me.î            

ìHow can you say that? Wouldnít She weep for you? Wouldnít her child?î            

ìYes, yes, thank God. I didnít quite mean what I said.î            

ìIt IS a thing to thank God for; is it not?î            

ìSurely, surely.î            

ìIf you could say, with truth, to your own solitary heart, to-night, ëI havesecured to myself the love and attachment, the gratitude or respect, of no humancreature; I have won myself a tender place in no regard; I have done nothinggood or serviceable to be remembered by!í your seventy-eight years would beseventy-eight heavy curses; would they not?î            

ìYou say truly, Mr. Carton; I think they would be.î            

Sydney turned his eyes again upon the fire, and, after a silence of a fewmoments, said:            

ìI should like to ask you: óDoes your childhood seem far off? Do the days whenyou sat at your motherís knee, seem days of very long ago?î            

Responding to his softened manner, Mr. Lorry answered:            

ìTwenty years back, yes; at this time of my life, no. For, as I draw closerand closer to the end, I travel in the circle, nearer and nearer to thebeginning. It seems to be one of the kind smoothings and preparings of the way.My heart is touched now, by many remembrances that had long fallen asleep, of mypretty young mother (and I so old!), and by many associations of the days whenwhat we call the World was not so real with me, and my faults were not confirmedin me.î            

ìI understand the feeling!î exclaimed Carton, with a bright flush. ìAnd youare the better for it?î            

ìI hope so.î            

Carton terminated the conversation here, by rising to help him on with hisouter coat; ìBut you,î said Mr. Lorry, reverting to the theme, ìyou areyoung.î            

ìYes,î said Carton. ìI am not old, but my young way was never the way to age.Enough of me.î            

ìAnd of me, I am sure,î said Mr. Lorry. ìAre you going out?î            

ìIíll walk with you to her gate. You know my vagabond and restless habits. IfI should prowl about the streets a long time, donít be uneasy; I shall reappearin the morning. You go to the Court to-morrow?î            

ìYes, unhappily.î            

ìI shall be there, but only as one of the crowd. My Spy will find a place forme. Take my arm, sir.î            

Mr. Lorry did so, and they went down-stairs and out in the streets. A fewminutes brought them to Mr. Lorryís destination. Carton left him there; butlingered at a little distance, and turned back to the gate again when it wasshut, and touched it. He had heard of her going to the prison every day. ìShecame out here,î he said, looking about him, ìturned this way, must have trod onthese stones often. Let me follow in her steps.î            

It was ten oíclock at night when he stood before the prison of La Force, whereshe had stood hundreds of times. A little wood-sawyer, having closed his shop,was smoking his pipe at his shop-door.            

ìGood night, citizen,î said Sydney Carton, pausing in going by; for, the maneyed him inquisitively.            

ìGood night, citizen.î            

ìHow goes the Republic?î            

ìYou mean the Guillotine. Not ill. Sixty-three to-day. We shall mount to ahundred soon. Samson and his men complain sometimes, of being exhausted. Ha, ha,ha! He is so droll, that Samson. Such a Barber!î            

ìDo you often go to see himóî            

ìShave? Always. Every day. What a barber! You have seen him at work?î            

ìNever.î            

ìGo and see him when he has a good batch. Figure this to yourself, citizen; heshaved the sixty-three to-day, in less than two pipes! Less than two pipes. Wordof honour!î            

As the grinning little man held out the pipe he was smoking, to explain how hetimed the executioner, Carton was so sensible of a rising desire to strike thelife out of him, that he turned away.            

ìBut you are not English,î said the wood-sawyer, ìthough you wear Englishdress?î            

ìYes,î said Carton, pausing again, and answering over his shoulder.            

ìYou speak like a Frenchman.î            

ìI am an old student here.î            

ìAha, a perfect Frenchman! Good night, Englishman.î            

ìGood night, citizen.î            

ìBut go and see that droll dog,î the little man persisted, calling after him.ìAnd take a pipe with you!î            

Sydney had not gone far out of sight, when he stopped in the middle of thestreet under a glimmering lamp, and wrote with his pencil on a scrap of paper.Then, traversing with the decided step of one who remembered the way well,several dark and dirty streetsómuch dirtier than usual, for the best publicthoroughfares remained uncleansed in those times of terroróhe stopped at achemistís shop, which the owner was closing with his own hands. A small, dim,crooked shop, kept in a tortuous, up-hill thoroughfare, by a small, dim, crookedman.            

Giving this citizen, too, good night, as he confronted him at his counter, helaid the scrap of paper before him. ìWhew!î the chemist whistled softly, as heread it. ìHi! hi! hi!î            

Sydney Carton took no heed, and the chemist said:            

ìFor you, citizen?î            

ìFor me.î            

ìYou will be careful to keep them separate, citizen? You know the consequencesof mixing them?î            

ìPerfectly.î            

Certain small packets were made and given to him. He put them, one by one, inthe breast of his inner coat, counted out the money for them, and deliberatelyleft the shop. ìThere is nothing more to do,î said he, glancing upward at themoon, ìuntil to-morrow. I canít sleep.î            

It was not a reckless manner, the manner in which he said these words aloudunder the fast-sailing clouds, nor was it more expressive of negligence thandefiance. It was the settled manner of a tired man, who had wandered andstruggled and got lost, but who at length struck into his road and saw itsend.            

Long ago, when he had been famous among his earliest competitors as a youth ofgreat promise, he had followed his father to the grave. His mother had died,years before. These solemn words, which had been read at his fatherís grave,arose in his mind as he went down the dark streets, among the heavy shadows,with the moon and the clouds sailing on high above him. ìI am the resurrectionand the life, saith the Lord: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yetshall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall neverdie.î            

In a city dominated by the axe, alone at night, with natural sorrow rising inhim for the sixty-three who had been that day put to death, and for to-morrowísvictims then awaiting their doom in the prisons, and still of to-morrowís andto-morrowís, the chain of association that brought the words home, like a rustyold shipís anchor from the deep, might have been easily found. He did not seekit, but repeated them and went on.            

With a solemn interest in the lighted windows where the people were going torest, forgetful through a few calm hours of the horrors surrounding them; in thetowers of the churches, where no prayers were said, for the popular revulsionhad even travelled that length of self-destruction from years of priestlyimpostors, plunderers, and profligates; in the distant burial-places, reserved,as they wrote upon the gates, for Eternal Sleep; in the abounding gaols; and inthe streets along which the sixties rolled to a death which had become so commonand material, that no sorrowful story of a haunting Spirit ever arose among thepeople out of all the working of the Guillotine; with a solemn interest in thewhole life and death of the city settling down to its short nightly pause infury; Sydney Carton crossed the Seine again for the lighter streets.            

Few coaches were abroad, for riders in coaches were liable to be suspected,and gentility hid its head in red nightcaps, and put on heavy shoes, andtrudged. But, the theatres were all well filled, and the people pouredcheerfully out as he passed, and went chatting home. At one of the theatredoors, there was a little girl with a mother, looking for a way across thestreet through the mud. He carried the child over, and before the timid arm wasloosed from his neck asked her for a kiss.            

ìI am the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord: he that believeth in me,though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth inme, shall never die.î            

Now, that the streets were quiet, and the night wore on, the words were in theechoes of his feet, and were in the air. Perfectly calm and steady, he sometimesrepeated them to himself as he walked; but, he heard them always.            

The night wore out, and, as he stood upon the bridge listening to the water asit splashed the river-walls of the Island of Paris, where the picturesqueconfusion of houses and cathedral shone bright in the light of the moon, the daycame coldly, looking like a dead face out of the sky. Then, the night, with themoon and the stars, turned pale and died, and for a little while it seemed as ifCreation were delivered over to Deathís dominion.            

But, the glorious sun, rising, seemed to strike those words, that burden ofthe night, straight and warm to his heart in its long bright rays. And lookingalong them, with reverently shaded eyes, a bridge of light appeared to span theair between him and the sun, while the river sparkled under it.            

The strong tide, so swift, so deep, and certain, was like a congenial friend,in the morning stillness. He walked by the stream, far from the houses, and inthe light and warmth of the sun fell asleep on the bank. When he awoke and wasafoot again, he lingered there yet a little longer, watching an eddy that turnedand turned purposeless, until the stream absorbed it, and carried it on to thesea. óîLike me.î            

A trading-boat, with a sail of the softened colour of a dead leaf, then glidedinto his view, floated by him, and died away. As its silent track in the waterdisappeared, the prayer that had broken up out of his heart for a mercifulconsideration of all his poor blindnesses and errors, ended in the words, ìI amthe resurrection and the life.î            

Mr. Lorry was already out when he got back, and it was easy to surmise wherethe good old man was gone. Sydney Carton drank nothing but a little coffee, atesome bread, and, having washed and changed to refresh himself, went out to theplace of trial.            

The court was all astir and a-buzz, when the black sheepówhom many fell awayfrom in dreadópressed him into an obscure corner among the crowd. Mr. Lorry wasthere, and Doctor Manette was there. She was there, sitting beside herfather.            

When her husband was brought in, she turned a look upon him, so sustaining, soencouraging, so full of admiring love and pitying tenderness, yet so courageousfor his sake, that it called the healthy blood into his face, brightened hisglance, and animated his heart. If there had been any eyes to notice theinfluence of her look, on Sydney Carton, it would have been seen to be the sameinfluence exactly.            

Before that unjust Tribunal, there was little or no order of procedure,ensuring to any accused person any reasonable hearing. There could have been nosuch Revolution, if all laws, forms, and ceremonies, had not first been somonstrously abused, that the suicidal vengeance of the Revolution was to scatterthem all to the winds.            

Every eye was turned to the jury. The same determined patriots and goodrepublicans as yesterday and the day before, and to-morrow and the day after.Eager and prominent among them, one man with a craving face, and his fingersperpetually hovering about his lips, whose appearance gave great satisfaction tothe spectators. A life-thirsting, cannibal-ooking, bloody-minded juryman, theJacques Three of St. Antoine. The whole jury, as a jury of dogs empannelled totry the deer.            

Every eye then turned to the five judges and the public prosecutor. Nofavourable leaning in that quarter to-day. A fell, uncompromising, murderousbusiness-meaning there. Every eye then sought some other eye in the crowd, andgleamed at it approvingly; and heads nodded at one another, before bendingforward with a strained attention.            

Charles Evremonde, called Darnay. Released yesterday. Reaccused and retakenyesterday. Indictment delivered to him last night. Suspected and Denounced enemyof the Republic, Aristocrat, one of a family of tyrants, one of a raceproscribed, for that they had used their abolished privileges to the infamousoppression of the people. Charles Evremonde, called Darnay, in right of suchproscription, absolutely Dead in Law.            

To this effect, in as few or fewer words, the Public Prosecutor.            

The President asked, was the Accused openly denounced or secretly?            

ìOpenly, President.î            

ìBy whom?î            

ìThree voices. Ernest Defarge, wine-vendor of St. Antoine.î            

ìGood.î            

ìTherese Defarge, his wife.î            

ìGood.î            

ìAlexandre Manette, physician.î            

A great uproar took place in the court, and in the midst of it, Doctor Manettewas seen, pale and trembling, standing where he had been seated.            

ìPresident, I indignantly protest to you that this is a forgery and a fraud.You know the accused to be the husband of my daughter. My daughter, and thosedear to her, are far dearer to me than my life. Who and where is the falseconspirator who says that I denounce the husband of my child!î            

ìCitizen Manette, be tranquil. To fail in submission to the authority of theTribunal would be to put yourself out of Law. As to what is dearer to you thanlife, nothing can be so dear to a good citizen as the Republic.î            

Loud acclamations hailed this rebuke. The President rang his bell, and withwarmth resumed.            

ìIf the Republic should demand of you the sacrifice of your child herself, youwould have no duty but to sacrifice her. Listen to what is to follow. In themeanwhile, be silent!î            

Frantic acclamations were again raised. Doctor Manette sat down, with his eyeslooking around, and his lips trembling; his daughter drew closer to him. Thecraving man on the jury rubbed his hands together, and restored the usual handto his mouth.            

Defarge was produced, when the court was quiet enough to admit of his beingheard, and rapidly expounded the story of the imprisonment, and of his havingbeen a mere boy in the Doctorís service, and of the release, and of the state ofthe prisoner when released and delivered to him. This short examinationfollowed, for the court was quick with its work.            

ìYou did good service at the taking of the Bastille, citizen?î            

ìI believe so.î            

Here, an excited woman screeched from the crowd: ìYou were one of the bestpatriots there. Why not say so? You were a cannonier that day there, and youwere among the first to enter the accursed fortress when it fell. Patriots, Ispeak the truth!î            

It was The Vengeance who, amidst the warm commendations of the audience, thusassisted the proceedings. The President rang his bell; but, The Vengeance,warming with encouragement, shrieked, ìI defy that bell!î wherein she waslikewise much commended.            

ìInform the Tribunal of what you did that day within the Bastille,citizen.î            

ìI knew,î said Defarge, looking down at his wife, who stood at the bottom ofthe steps on which he was raised, looking steadily up at him; ìI knew that thisprisoner, of whom I speak, had been confined in a cell known as One Hundred andFive, North Tower. I knew it from himself. He knew himself by no other name thanOne Hundred and Five, North Tower, when he made shoes under my care. As I servemy gun that day, I resolve, when the place shall fall, to examine that cell. Itfalls. I mount to the cell, with a fellow-citizen who is one of the Jury,directed by a gaoler. I examine it, very closely. In a hole in the chimney,where a stone has been worked out and replaced, I find a written paper. This isthat written paper. I have made it my business to examine some specimens of thewriting of Doctor Manette. This is the writing of Doctor Manette. I confide thispaper, in the writing of Doctor Manette, to the hands of the President.î            

ìLet it be read.î            

In a dead silence and stillnessóthe prisoner under trial looking lovingly athis wife, his wife only looking from him to look with solicitude at her father,Doctor Manette keeping his eyes fixed on the reader, Madame Defarge never takinghers from the prisoner, Defarge never taking his from his feasting wife, and allthe other eyes there intent upon the Doctor, who saw none of themóthe paper wasread, as follows.            

ìI, Alexandre Manette, unfortunate physician, native of Beauvais, andafterwards resident in Paris, write this melancholy paper in my doleful cell inthe Bastille, during the last month of the year, 1767. I write it at stolenintervals, under every difficulty. I design to secrete it in the wall of thechimney, where I have slowly and laboriously made a place of concealment for it.Some pitying hand may find it there, when I and my sorrows are dust.            

ìThese words are formed by the rusty iron point with which I write withdifficulty in scrapings of soot and charcoal from the chimney, mixed with blood,in the last month of the tenth year of my captivity. Hope has quite departedfrom my breast. I know from terrible warnings I have noted in myself that myreason will not long remain unimpaired, but I solemnly declare that I am at thistime in the possession of my right mindóthat my memory is exact andcircumstantialóand that I write the truth as I shall answer for these my lastrecorded words, whether they be ever read by men or not, at the EternalJudgment-seat.            

ìOne cloudy moonlight night, in the third week of December (I think thetwenty-second of the month) in the year 1757, I was walking on a retired part ofthe quay by the Seine for the refreshment of the frosty air, at an hourísdistance from my place of residence in the Street of the School of Medicine,when a carriage came along behind me, driven very fast. As I stood aside to letthat carriage pass, apprehensive that it might otherwise run me down, a head wasput out at the window, and a voice called to the driver to stop.            

ìThe carriage stopped as soon as the driver could rein in his horses, and thesame voice called to me by my name. I answered. The carriage was then so far inadvance of me that two gentlemen had time to open the door and alight before Icame up with it.            

ìI observed that they were both wrapped in cloaks, and appeared to concealthemselves. As they stood side by side near the carriage door, I also observedthat they both looked of about my own age, or rather younger, and that they weregreatly alike, in stature, manner, voice, and (as far as I could see) facetoo.            

ìëYou are Doctor Manette?í said one.            

ìI am.î            

ìëDoctor Manette, formerly of Beauvais,í said the other; ëthe young physician,originally an expert surgeon, who within the last year or two has made a risingreputation in Paris?í            

ìëGentlemen,í I returned, ëI am that Doctor Manette of whom you speak sograciously.í            

ìëWe have been to your residence,í said the first, ëand not being so fortunateas to find you there, and being informed that you were probably walking in thisdirection, we followed, in the hope of overtaking you. Will you please to enterthe carriage?í            

ìThe manner of both was imperious, and they both moved, as these words werespoken, so as to place me between themselves and the carriage door. They werearmed. I was not.            

ìëGentlemen,í said I, ëpardon me; but I usually inquire who does me the honourto seek my assistance, and what is the nature of the case to which I amsummoned.í            

ìThe reply to this was made by him who had spoken second. ëDoctor, yourclients are people of condition. As to the nature of the case, our confidence inyour skill assures us that you will ascertain it for yourself better than we candescribe it. Enough. Will you please to enter the carriage?í            

ìI could do nothing but comply, and I entered it in silence. They both enteredafter meóthe last springing in, after putting up the steps. The carriage turnedabout, and drove on at its former speed.            

ìI repeat this conversation exactly as it occurred. I have no doubt that itis, word for word, the same. I describe everything exactly as it took place,constraining my mind not to wander from the task. Where I make the broken marksthat follow here, I leave off for the time, and put my paper in itshiding-place.            

 * * *            

ìThe carriage left the streets behind, passed the North Barrier, and emergedupon the country road. At two-thirds of a league from the BarrieróI did notestimate the distance at that time, but afterwards when I traversed itóit struckout of the main avenue, and presently stopped at a solitary house. We all threealighted, and walked, by a damp soft footpath in a garden where a neglectedfountain had overflowed, to the door of the house. It was not openedimmediately, in answer to the ringing of the bell, and one of my two conductorsstruck the man who opened it, with his heavy riding glove, across theface.            

ìThere was nothing in this action to attract my particular attention, for Ihad seen common people struck more commonly than dogs. But, the other of thetwo, being angry likewise, struck the man in like manner with his arm; the lookand bearing of the brothers were then so exactly alike, that I then firstperceived them to be twin brothers.            

ìFrom the time of our alighting at the outer gate (which we found locked, andwhich one of the brothers had opened to admit us, and had relocked), I had heardcries proceeding from an upper chamber. I was conducted to this chamberstraight, the cries growing louder as we ascended the stairs, and I found apatient in a high fever of the brain, lying on a bed.            

ìThe patient was a woman of great beauty, and young; assuredly not much pasttwenty. Her hair was torn and ragged, and her arms were bound to her sides withsashes and handkerchiefs. I noticed that these bonds were all portions of agentlemanís dress. On one of them, which was a fringed scarf for a dress ofceremony, I saw the armorial bearings of a Noble, and the letter E.            

ìI saw this, within the first minute of my contemplation of the patient; for,in her restless strivings she had turned over on her face on the edge of thebed, had drawn the end of the scarf into her mouth, and was in danger ofsuffocation. My first act was to put out my hand to relieve her breathing; andin moving the scarf aside, the embroidery in the corner caught my sight.            

ìI turned her gently over, placed my hands upon her breast to calm her andkeep her down, and looked into her face. Her eyes were dilated and wild, and sheconstantly uttered piercing shrieks, and repeated the words, ëMy husband, myfather, and my brother!í and then counted up to twelve, and said, ëHush!í For aninstant, and no more, she would pause to listen, and then the piercing shriekswould begin again, and she would repeat the cry, ëMy husband, my father, and mybrother!í and would count up to twelve, and say, ëHush!í There was no variationin the order, or the manner. There was no cessation, but the regular momentíspause, in the utterance of these sounds.            

ìëHow long,í I asked, ëhas this lasted?í            

ìTo distinguish the brothers, I will call them the elder and the younger; bythe elder, I mean him who exercised the most authority. It was the elder whoreplied, ëSince about this hour last night.í            

ìëShe has a husband, a father, and a brother?í            

ìëA brother.í            

ìëI do not address her brother?í            

ìHe answered with great contempt, ëNo.í            

ìëShe has some recent association with the number twelve?í            

ìThe younger brother impatiently rejoined, ëWith twelve oíclock?í            

ìëSee, gentlemen,í said I, still keeping my hands upon her breast, ëhowuseless I am, as you have brought me! If I had known what I was coming to see, Icould have come provided. As it is, time must be lost. There are no medicines tobe obtained in this lonely place.í            

ìThe elder brother looked to the younger, who said haughtily, ëThere is a caseof medicines here;í and brought it from a closet, and put it on thetable.            

 * * *            

ìI opened some of the bottles, smelt them, and put the stoppers to my lips. IfI had wanted to use anything save narcotic medicines that were poisons inthemselves, I would not have administered any of those.             

ìëDo you doubt them?í asked the younger brother.            

ìëYou see, monsieur, I am going to use them,í I replied, and said nomore.            

ìI made the patient swallow, with great difficulty, and after many efforts,the dose that I desired to give. As I intended to repeat it after a while, andas it was necessary to watch its influence, I then sat down by the side of thebed. There was a timid and suppressed woman in attendance (wife of the mandown-stairs), who had retreated into a corner. The house was damp and decayed,indifferently furnishedóevidently, recently occupied and temporarily used. Somethick old hangings had been nailed up before the windows, to deaden the sound ofthe shrieks. They continued to be uttered in their regular succession, with thecry, ëMy husband, my father, and my brother!í the counting up to twelve, andëHush!í The frenzy was so violent, that I had not unfastened the bandagesrestraining the arms; but, I had looked to them, to see that they were notpainful. The only spark of encouragement in the case, was, that my hand upon thesuffererís breast had this much soothing influence, that for minutes at a timeit tranquillised the figure. It had no effect upon the cries; no pendulum couldbe more regular.            

ìFor the reason that my hand had this effect (I assume), I had sat by the sideof the bed for half an hour, with the two brothers looking on, before the eldersaid:            

ìëThere is another patient.í            

ìI was startled, and asked, ëIs it a pressing case?í            

ìëYou had better see,í he carelessly answered; and took up a light.            

 * * *            

ìThe other patient lay in a back room across a second staircase, which was aspecies of loft over a stable. There was a low plastered ceiling to a part ofit; the rest was open, to the ridge of the tiled roof, and there were beamsacross. Hay and straw were stored in that portion of the place, fagots forfiring, and a heap of apples in sand. I had to pass through that part, to get atthe other. My memory is circumstantial and unshaken. I try it with thesedetails, and I see them all, in this my cell in the Bastille, near the close ofthe tenth year of my captivity, as I saw them all that night.            

ìOn some hay on the ground, with a cushion thrown under his head, lay ahandsome peasant boyóa boy of not more than seventeen at the most. He lay on hisback, with his teeth set, his right hand clenched on his breast, and his glaringeyes looking straight upward. I could not see where his wound was, as I kneeledon one knee over him; but, I could see that he was dying of a wound from a sharppoint.            

ìëI am a doctor, my poor fellow,í said I. ëLet me examine it.í            

ìëI do not want it examined,í he answered; ëlet it be.í            

ìIt was under his hand, and I soothed him to let me move his hand away. Thewound was a sword-thrust, received from twenty to twenty-four hours before, butno skill could have saved him if it had been looked to without delay. He wasthen dying fast. As I turned my eyes to the elder brother, I saw him lookingdown at this handsome boy whose life was ebbing out, as if he were a woundedbird, or hare, or rabbit; not at all as if he were a fellow-creature.            

ìëHow has this been done, monsieur?í said I.            

ìëA crazed young common dog! A serf! Forced my brother to draw upon him, andhas fallen by my brotherís swordólike a gentleman.í            

ìThere was no touch of pity, sorrow, or kindred humanity, in this answer. Thespeaker seemed to acknowledge that it was inconvenient to have that differentorder of creature dying there, and that it would have been better if he had diedin the usual obscure routine of his vermin kind. He was quite incapable of anycompassionate feeling about the boy, or about his fate.            

ìThe boyís eyes had slowly moved to him as he had spoken, and they now slowlymoved to me.            

ìëDoctor, they are very proud, these Nobles; but we common dogs are proud too,sometimes. They plunder us, outrage us, beat us, kill us; but we have a littlepride left, sometimes. Sheóhave you seen her, Doctor?í            

ìThe shrieks and the cries were audible there, though subdued by the distance.He referred to them, as if she were lying in our presence.            

ìI said, ëI have seen her.í            

ìëShe is my sister, Doctor. They have had their shameful rights, these Nobles,in the modesty and virtue of our sisters, many years, but we have had good girlsamong us. I know it, and have heard my father say so. She was a good girl. Shewas betrothed to a good young man, too: a tenant of his. We were all tenants ofhisóthat manís who stands there. The other is his brother, the worst of a badrace.í            

ìIt was with the greatest difficulty that the boy gathered bodily force tospeak; but, his spirit spoke with a dreadful emphasis.            

ìëWe were so robbed by that man who stands there, as all we common dogs are bythose superior Beingsótaxed by him without mercy, obliged to work for himwithout pay, obliged to grind our corn at his mill, obliged to feed scores ofhis tame birds on our wretched crops, and forbidden for our lives to keep asingle tame bird of our own, pillaged and plundered to that degree that when wechanced to have a bit of meat, we ate it in fear, with the door barred and theshutters closed, that his people should not see it and take it from usóI say, wewere so robbed, and hunted, and were made so poor, that our father told us itwas a dreadful thing to bring a child into the world, and that what we shouldmost pray for, was, that our women might be barren and our miserable race dieout!í            

ìI had never before seen the sense of being oppressed, bursting forth like afire. I had supposed that it must be latent in the people somewhere; but, I hadnever seen it break out, until I saw it in the dying boy.            

ìëNevertheless, Doctor, my sister married. He was ailing at that time, poorfellow, and she married her lover, that she might tend and comfort him in ourcottageóour dog-hut, as that man would call it. She had not been married manyweeks, when that manís brother saw her and admired her, and asked that man tolend her to himófor what are husbands among us! He was willing enough, but mysister was good and virtuous, and hated his brother with a hatred as strong asmine. What did the two then, to persuade her husband to use his influence withher, to make her willing?í            

ìThe boyís eyes, which had been fixed on mine, slowly turned to the looker-on,and I saw in the two faces that all he said was true. The two opposing kinds ofpride confronting one another, I can see, even in this Bastille; thegentlemanís, all negligent indifference; the peasants, all trodden-downsentiment, and passionate revenge.            

ìëYou know, Doctor, that it is among the Rights of these Nobles to harness uscommon dogs to carts, and drive us. They so harnessed him and drove him. Youknow that it is among their Rights to keep us in their grounds all night,quieting the frogs, in order that their noble sleep may not be disturbed. Theykept him out in the unwholesome mists at night, and ordered him back into hisharness in the day. But he was not persuaded. No! Taken out of harness one dayat noon, to feedóif he could find foodóhe sobbed twelve times, once for everystroke of the bell, and died on her bosom.í            

ìNothing human could have held life in the boy but his determination to tellall his wrong. He forced back the gathering shadows of death, as he forced hisclenched right hand to remain clenched, and to cover his wound.            

ìëThen, with that manís permission and even with his aid, his brother took heraway; in spite of what I know she must have told his brotheróand what that is,will not be long unknown to you, Doctor, if it is nowóhis brother took herawayófor his pleasure and diversion, for a little while. I saw her pass me onthe road. When I took the tidings home, our fatherís heart burst; he never spokeone of the words that filled it. I took my young sister (for I have another) toa place beyond the reach of this man, and where, at least, she will never be HISvassal. Then, I tracked the brother here, and last night climbed inóa commondog, but sword in hand. óWhere is the loft window? It was somewherehere?í            

ìThe room was darkening to his sight; the world was narrowing around him. Iglanced about me, and saw that the hay and straw were trampled over the floor,as if there had been a struggle.            

ìëShe heard me, and ran in. I told her not to come near us till he was dead.He came in and first tossed me some pieces of money; then struck at me with awhip. But I, though a common dog, so struck at him as to make him draw. Let himbreak into as many pieces as he will, the sword that he stained with my commonblood; he drew to defend himselfóthrust at me with all his skill for hislife.í            

ìMy glance had fallen, but a few moments before, on the fragments of a brokensword, lying among the hay. That weapon was a gentlemanís. In another place, layan old sword that seemed to have been a soldierís.            

ìëNow, lift me up, Doctor; lift me up. Where is he?í            

ìëHe is not here,í I said, supporting the boy, and thinking that he referredto the brother.            

ìëHe! Proud as these nobles are, he is afraid to see me. Where is the man whowas here? Turn my face to him.í            

ìI did so, raising the boyís head against my knee. But, invested for themoment with extraordinary power, he raised himself completely: obliging me torise too, or I could not have still supported him.            

ìëMarquis,í said the boy, turned to him with his eyes opened wide, and hisright hand raised, ëin the days when all these things are to be answered for, Isummon you and yours, to the last of your bad race, to answer for them. I markthis cross of blood upon you, as a sign that I do it. In the days when all thesethings are to be answered for, I summon your brother, the worst of the bad race,to answer for them separately. I mark this cross of blood upon him, as a signthat I do it.í            

ìTwice, he put his hand to the wound in his breast, and with his forefingerdrew a cross in the air. He stood for an instant with the finger yet raised, andas it dropped, he dropped with it, and I laid him down dead.            

 * * *            

ìWhen I returned to the bedside of the young woman, I found her raving inprecisely the same order of continuity. I knew that this might last for manyhours, and that it would probably end in the silence of the grave.            

ìI repeated the medicines I had given her, and I sat at the side of the beduntil the night was far advanced. She never abated the piercing quality of hershrieks, never stumbled in the distinctness or the order of her words. They werealways ëMy husband, my father, and my brother! One, two, three, four, five, six,seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve. Hush!í            

ìThis lasted twenty-six hours from the time when I first saw her. I had comeand gone twice, and was again sitting by her, when she began to falter. I didwhat little could be done to assist that opportunity, and by-and-bye she sankinto a lethargy, and lay like the dead.            

ìIt was as if the wind and rain had lulled at last, after a long and fearfulstorm. I released her arms, and called the woman to assist me to compose herfigure and the dress she had torn. It was then that I knew her condition to bethat of one in whom the first expectations of being a mother have arisen; and itwas then that I lost the little hope I had had of her.            

ìëIs she dead?í asked the Marquis, whom I will still describe as the elderbrother, coming booted into the room from his horse.            

ìëNot dead,í said I; ëbut like to die.í            

ìëWhat strength there is in these common bodies!í he said, looking down at herwith some curiosity.            

ìëThere is prodigious strength,í I answered him, ëin sorrow anddespair.í            

ìHe first laughed at my words, and then frowned at them. He moved a chair withhis foot near to mine, ordered the woman away, and said in a subduedvoice,            

ìëDoctor, finding my brother in this difficulty with these hinds, Irecommended that your aid should be invited. Your reputation is high, and, as ayoung man with your fortune to make, you are probably mindful of your interest.The things that you see here, are things to be seen, and not spoken of.í            

ìI listened to the patientís breathing, and avoided answering.            

ìëDo you honour me with your attention, Doctor?í            

ìëMonsieur,í said I, ëin my profession, the communications of patients arealways received in confidence.í I was guarded in my answer, for I was troubledin my mind with what I had heard and seen.            

ìHer breathing was so difficult to trace, that I carefully tried the pulse andthe heart. There was life, and no more. Looking round as I resumed my seat, Ifound both the brothers intent upon me.            

 * * *            

ìI write with so much difficulty, the cold is so severe, I am so fearful ofbeing detected and consigned to an underground cell and total darkness, that Imust abridge this narrative. There is no confusion or failure in my memory; itcan recall, and could detail, every word that was ever spoken between me andthose brothers.            

ìShe lingered for a week. Towards the last, I could understand some fewsyllables that she said to me, by placing my ear close to her lips. She asked mewhere she was, and I told her; who I was, and I told her. It was in vain that Iasked her for her family name. She faintly shook her head upon the pillow, andkept her secret, as the boy had done.            

ìI had no opportunity of asking her any question, until I had told thebrothers she was sinking fast, and could not live another day. Until then,though no one was ever presented to her consciousness save the woman and myself,one or other of them had always jealously sat behind the curtain at the head ofthe bed when I was there. But when it came to that, they seemed careless whatcommunication I might hold with her; as ifóthe thought passed through my mindóIwere dying too.            

ìI always observed that their pride bitterly resented the younger brotherís(as I call him) having crossed swords with a peasant, and that peasant a boy.The only consideration that appeared to affect the mind of either of them wasthe consideration that this was highly degrading to the family, and wasridiculous. As often as I caught the younger brotherís eyes, their expressionreminded me that he disliked me deeply, for knowing what I knew from the boy. Hewas smoother and more polite to me than the elder; but I saw this. I also sawthat I was an incumbrance in the mind of the elder, too.            

ìMy patient died, two hours before midnightóat a time, by my watch, answeringalmost to the minute when I had first seen her. I was alone with her, when herforlorn young head drooped gently on one side, and all her earthly wrongs andsorrows ended.            

ìThe brothers were waiting in a room down-stairs, impatient to ride away. Ihad heard them, alone at the bedside, striking their boots with theirriding-whips, and loitering up and down.            

ìëAt last she is dead?í said the elder, when I went in.            

ìëShe is dead,í said I.            

ìëI congratulate you, my brother,í were his words as he turned round.            

ìHe had before offered me money, which I had postponed taking. He now gave mea rouleau of gold. I took it from his hand, but laid it on the table. I hadconsidered the question, and had resolved to accept nothing.            

ìëPray excuse me,í said I. ëUnder the circumstances, no.í            

ìThey exchanged looks, but bent their heads to me as I bent mine to them, andwe parted without another word on either side.            

 * * *            

ìI am weary, weary, wearyóworn down by misery. I cannot read what I havewritten with this gaunt hand.            

ìEarly in the morning, the rouleau of gold was left at my door in a littlebox, with my name on the outside. From the first, I had anxiously consideredwhat I ought to do. I decided, that day, to write privately to the Minister,stating the nature of the two cases to which I had been summoned, and the placeto which I had gone: in effect, stating all the circumstances. I knew what Courtinfluence was, and what the immunities of the Nobles were, and I expected thatthe matter would never be heard of; but, I wished to relieve my own mind. I hadkept the matter a profound secret, even from my wife; and this, too, I resolvedto state in my letter. I had no apprehension whatever of my real danger; but Iwas conscious that there might be danger for others, if others were compromisedby possessing the knowledge that I possessed.            

ìI was much engaged that day, and could not complete my letter that night. Irose long before my usual time next morning to finish it. It was the last day ofthe year. The letter was lying before me just completed, when I was told that alady waited, who wished to see me.            

 * * *            

ìI am growing more and more unequal to the task I have set myself. It is socold, so dark, my senses are so benumbed, and the gloom upon me is sodreadful.            

ìThe lady was young, engaging, and handsome, but not marked for long life. Shewas in great agitation. She presented herself to me as the wife of the MarquisSt. Evremonde. I connected the title by which the boy had addressed the elderbrother, with the initial letter embroidered on the scarf, and had no difficultyin arriving at the conclusion that I had seen that nobleman very lately.            

ìMy memory is still accurate, but I cannot write the words of ourconversation. I suspect that I am watched more closely than I was, and I knownot at what times I may be watched. She had in part suspected, and in partdiscovered, the main facts of the cruel story, of her husbandís share in it, andmy being resorted to. She did not know that the girl was dead. Her hope hadbeen, she said in great distress, to show her, in secret, a womanís sympathy.Her hope had been to avert the wrath of Heaven from a House that had long beenhateful to the suffering many.            

ìShe had reasons for believing that there was a young sister living, and hergreatest desire was, to help that sister. I could tell her nothing but thatthere was such a sister; beyond that, I knew nothing. Her inducement to come tome, relying on my confidence, had been the hope that I could tell her the nameand place of abode. Whereas, to this wretched hour I am ignorant of both.            

 * * *            

ìThese scraps of paper fail me. One was taken from me, with a warning,yesterday. I must finish my record to-day.            

ìShe was a good, compassionate lady, and not happy in her marriage. How couldshe be! The brother distrusted and disliked her, and his influence was allopposed to her; she stood in dread of him, and in dread of her husband too. WhenI handed her down to the door, there was a child, a pretty boy from two to threeyears old, in her carriage.            

ìëFor his sake, Doctor,í she said, pointing to him in tears, ëI would do all Ican to make what poor amends I can. He will never prosper in his inheritanceotherwise. I have a presentiment that if no other innocent atonement is made forthis, it will one day be required of him. What I have left to call my ownóit islittle beyond the worth of a few jewelsóI will make it the first charge of hislife to bestow, with the compassion and lamenting of his dead mother, on thisinjured family, if the sister can be discovered.í            

ìShe kissed the boy, and said, caressing him, ëIt is for thine own dear sake.Thou wilt be faithful, little Charles?í The child answered her bravely, ëYes!í Ikissed her hand, and she took him in her arms, and went away caressing him. Inever saw her more.            

ìAs she had mentioned her husbandís name in the faith that I knew it, I addedno mention of it to my letter. I sealed my letter, and, not trusting it out ofmy own hands, delivered it myself that day.            

ìThat night, the last night of the year, towards nine oíclock, a man in ablack dress rang at my gate, demanded to see me, and softly followed my servant,Ernest Defarge, a youth, up-stairs. When my servant came into the room where Isat with my wifeóO my wife, beloved of my heart! My fair young English wife! ówesaw the man, who was supposed to be at the gate, standing silent behindhim.            

ìAn urgent case in the Rue St. Honore, he said. It would not detain me, he hada coach in waiting.            

ìIt brought me here, it brought me to my grave. When I was clear of the house,a black muffler was drawn tightly over my mouth from behind, and my arms werepinioned. The two brothers crossed the road from a dark corner, and identifiedme with a single gesture. The Marquis took from his pocket the letter I hadwritten, showed it me, burnt it in the light of a lantern that was held, andextinguished the ashes with his foot. Not a word was spoken. I was brought here,I was brought to my living grave.            

ìIf it had pleased GOD to put it in the hard heart of either of the brothers,in all these frightful years, to grant me any tidings of my dearest wifeóso muchas to let me know by a word whether alive or deadóI might have thought that Hehad not quite abandoned them. But, now I believe that the mark of the red crossis fatal to them, and that they have no part in His mercies. And them and theirdescendants, to the last of their race, I, Alexandre Manette, unhappy prisoner,do this last night of the year 1767, in my unbearable agony, denounce to thetimes when all these things shall be answered for. I denounce them to Heaven andto earth.î            

A terrible sound arose when the reading of this document was done. A sound ofcraving and eagerness that had nothing articulate in it but blood. The narrativecalled up the most revengeful passions of the time, and there was not a head inthe nation but must have dropped before it.            

Little need, in presence of that tribunal and that auditory, to show how theDefarges had not made the paper public, with the other captured Bastillememorials borne in procession, and had kept it, biding their time. Little needto show that this detested family name had long been anathematised by SaintAntoine, and was wrought into the fatal register. The man never trod groundwhose virtues and services would have sustained him in that place that day,against such denunciation.            

And all the worse for the doomed man, that the denouncer was a well-knowncitizen, his own attached friend, the father of his wife. One of the frenziedaspirations of the populace was, for imitations of the questionable publicvirtues of antiquity, and for sacrifices and self-immolations on the peopleísaltar. Therefore when the President said (else had his own head quivered on hisshoulders), that the good physician of the Republic would deserve better stillof the Republic by rooting out an obnoxious family of Aristocrats, and woulddoubtless feel a sacred glow and joy in making his daughter a widow and herchild an orphan, there was wild excitement, patriotic fervour, not a touch ofhuman sympathy.            

ìMuch influence around him, has that Doctor?î murmured Madame Defarge, smilingto The Vengeance. ìSave him now, my Doctor, save him!î            

At every jurymanís vote, there was a roar. Another and another. Roar androar.            

Unanimously voted. At heart and by descent an Aristocrat, an enemy of theRepublic, a notorious oppressor of the People. Back to the Conciergerie, andDeath within four-and-twenty hours!            

The wretched wife of the innocent man thus doomed to die, fell under thesentence, as if she had been mortally stricken. But, she uttered no sound; andso strong was the voice within her, representing that it was she of all theworld who must uphold him in his misery and not augment it, that it quicklyraised her, even from that shock.            

The Judges having to take part in a public demonstration out of doors, theTribunal adjourned. The quick noise and movement of the courtís emptying itselfby many passages had not ceased, when Lucie stood stretching out her armstowards her husband, with nothing in her face but love and consolation.            

ìIf I might touch him! If I might embrace him once! O, good citizens, if youwould have so much compassion for us!î            

There was but a gaoler left, along with two of the four men who had taken himlast night, and Barsad. The people had all poured out to the show in thestreets. Barsad proposed to the rest, ìLet her embrace him then; it is but amoment.î It was silently acquiesced in, and they passed her over the seats inthe hall to a raised place, where he, by leaning over the dock, could fold herin his arms.            

ìFarewell, dear darling of my soul. My parting blessing on my love. We shallmeet again, where the weary are at rest!î            

They were her husbandís words, as he held her to his bosom.            

ìI can bear it, dear Charles. I am supported from above: donít suffer for me.A parting blessing for our child.î            

ìI send it to her by you. I kiss her by you. I say farewell to her byyou.î            

ìMy husband. No! A moment!î He was tearing himself apart from her. ìWe shallnot be separated long. I feel that this will break my heart by-and-bye; but Iwill do my duty while I can, and when I leave her, God will raise up friends forher, as He did for me.î            

Her father had followed her, and would have fallen on his knees to both ofthem, but that Darnay put out a hand and seized him, crying:            

ìNo, no! What have you done, what have you done, that you should kneel to us!We know now, what a struggle you made of old. We know, now what you underwentwhen you suspected my descent, and when you knew it. We know now, the naturalantipathy you strove against, and conquered, for her dear sake. We thank youwith all our hearts, and all our love and duty. Heaven be with you!î            

Her fatherís only answer was to draw his hands through his white hair, andwring them with a shriek of anguish.            

ìIt could not be otherwise,î said the prisoner. ìAll things have workedtogether as they have fallen out. It was the always-vain endeavour to dischargemy poor motherís trust that first brought my fatal presence near you. Good couldnever come of such evil, a happier end was not in nature to so unhappy abeginning. Be comforted, and forgive me. Heaven bless you!î            

As he was drawn away, his wife released him, and stood looking after him withher hands touching one another in the attitude of prayer, and with a radiantlook upon her face, in which there was even a comforting smile. As he went outat the prisonersí door, she turned, laid her head lovingly on her fatherísbreast, tried to speak to him, and fell at his feet.            

Then, issuing from the obscure corner from which he had never moved, SydneyCarton came and took her up. Only her father and Mr. Lorry were with her. Hisarm trembled as it raised her, and supported her head. Yet, there was an airabout him that was not all of pityóthat had a flush of pride in it.            

ìShall I take her to a coach? I shall never feel her weight.î            

He carried her lightly to the door, and laid her tenderly down in a coach. Herfather and their old friend got into it, and he took his seat beside thedriver.            

When they arrived at the gateway where he had paused in the dark not manyhours before, to picture to himself on which of the rough stones of the streether feet had trodden, he lifted her again, and carried her up the staircase totheir rooms. There, he laid her down on a couch, where her child and Miss Prosswept over her.            

ìDonít recall her to herself,î he said, softly, to the latter, ìshe is betterso. Donít revive her to consciousness, while she only faints.î            

ìOh, Carton, Carton, dear Carton!î cried little Lucie, springing up andthrowing her arms passionately round him, in a burst of grief. ìNow that youhave come, I think you will do something to help mamma, something to save papa!O, look at her, dear Carton! Can you, of all the people who love her, bear tosee her so?î            

He bent over the child, and laid her blooming cheek against his face. He puther gently from him, and looked at her unconscious mother.            

ìBefore I go,î he said, and pausedóîI may kiss her?î            

It was remembered afterwards that when he bent down and touched her face withhis lips, he murmured some words. The child, who was nearest to him, told themafterwards, and told her grandchildren when she was a handsome old lady, thatshe heard him say, ìA life you love.î            

When he had gone out into the next room, he turned suddenly on Mr. Lorry andher father, who were following, and said to the latter:            

ìYou had great influence but yesterday, Doctor Manette; let it at least betried. These judges, and all the men in power, are very friendly to you, andvery recognisant of your services; are they not?î            

ìNothing connected with Charles was concealed from me. I had the strongestassurances that I should save him; and I did.î He returned the answer in greattrouble, and very slowly.            

ìTry them again. The hours between this and to-morrow afternoon are few andshort, but try.î            

ìI intend to try. I will not rest a moment.î            

ìThatís well. I have known such energy as yours do great things beforenowóthough never,î he added, with a smile and a sigh together, ìsuch greatthings as this. But try! Of little worth as life is when we misuse it, it isworth that effort. It would cost nothing to lay down if it were not.î            

ìI will go,î said Doctor Manette, ìto the Prosecutor and the Presidentstraight, and I will go to others whom it is better not to name. I will writetoo, andóBut stay! There is a Celebration in the streets, and no one will beaccessible until dark.î            

ìThatís true. Well! It is a forlorn hope at the best, and not much theforlorner for being delayed till dark. I should like to know how you speed;though, mind! I expect nothing! When are you likely to have seen these dreadpowers, Doctor Manette?î            

ìImmediately after dark, I should hope. Within an hour or two fromthis.î            

ìIt will be dark soon after four. Let us stretch the hour or two. If I go toMr. Lorryís at nine, shall I hear what you have done, either from our friend orfrom yourself?î            

ìYes.î            

ìMay you prosper!î            

Mr. Lorry followed Sydney to the outer door, and, touching him on the shoulderas he was going away, caused him to turn.            

ìI have no hope,î said Mr. Lorry, in a low and sorrowful whisper.            

ìNor have I.î            

ìIf any one of these men, or all of these men, were disposed to sparehimówhich is a large supposition; for what is his life, or any manís to them!óIdoubt if they durst spare him after the demonstration in the court.î            

ìAnd so do I. I heard the fall of the axe in that sound.î            

Mr. Lorry leaned his arm upon the door-post, and bowed his face uponit.            

ìDonít despond,î said Carton, very gently; ìdonít grieve. I encouraged DoctorManette in this idea, because I felt that it might one day be consolatory toher. Otherwise, she might think ëhis life was want only thrown away or wasted,íand that might trouble her.î            

ìYes, yes, yes,î returned Mr. Lorry, drying his eyes, ìyou are right. But hewill perish; there is no real hope.î            

ìYes. He will perish: there is no real hope,î echoed Carton.            

And walked with a settled step, down-stairs.            

Sydney Carton paused in the street, not quite decided where to go. ìAtTellsonís banking-house at nine,î he said, with a musing face. ìShall I do well,in the mean time, to show myself? I think so. It is best that these peopleshould know there is such a man as I here; it is a sound precaution, and may bea necessary preparation. But care, care, care! Let me think it out!î            

Checking his steps which had begun to tend towards an object, he took a turnor two in the already darkening street, and traced the thought in his mind toits possible consequences. His first impression was confirmed. ìIt is best,î hesaid, finally resolved, ìthat these people should know there is such a man as Ihere.î And he turned his face towards Saint Antoine.            

Defarge had described himself, that day, as the keeper of a wine-shop in theSaint Antoine suburb. It was not difficult for one who knew the city well, tofind his house without asking any question. Having ascertained its situation,Carton came out of those closer streets again, and dined at a place ofrefreshment and fell sound asleep after dinner. For the first time in manyyears, he had no strong drink. Since last night he had taken nothing but alittle light thin wine, and last night he had dropped the brandy slowly down onMr. Lorryís hearth like a man who had done with it.            

It was as late as seven oíclock when he awoke refreshed, and went out into thestreets again. As he passed along towards Saint Antoine, he stopped at ashop-window where there was a mirror, and slightly altered the disorderedarrangement of his loose cravat, and his coat-collar, and his wild hair. Thisdone, he went on direct to Defargeís, and went in.            

There happened to be no customer in the shop but Jacques Three, of therestless fingers and the croaking voice. This man, whom he had seen upon theJury, stood drinking at the little counter, in conversation with the Defarges,man and wife. The Vengeance assisted in the conversation, like a regular memberof the establishment.            

As Carton walked in, took his seat and asked (in very indifferent French) fora small measure of wine, Madame Defarge cast a careless glance at him, and thena keener, and then a keener, and then advanced to him herself, and asked himwhat it was he had ordered.            

He repeated what he had already said.            

ìEnglish?î asked Madame Defarge, inquisitively raising her darkeyebrows.            

After looking at her, as if the sound of even a single French word were slowto express itself to him, he answered, in his former strong foreign accent.ìYes, madame, yes. I am English!î            

Madame Defarge returned to her counter to get the wine, and, as he took up aJacobin journal and feigned to pore over it puzzling out its meaning, he heardher say, ìI swear to you, like Evremonde!î            

Defarge brought him the wine, and gave him Good Evening.            

ìHow?î            

ìGood evening.î            

ìOh! Good evening, citizen,î filling his glass. ìAh! and good wine. I drink tothe Republic.î            

Defarge went back to the counter, and said, ìCertainly, a little like.î Madamesternly retorted, ìI tell you a good deal like.î Jacques Three pacificallyremarked, ìHe is so much in your mind, see you, madame.î The amiable Vengeanceadded, with a laugh, ìYes, my faith! And you are looking forward with so muchpleasure to seeing him once more to-morrow!î            

Carton followed the lines and words of his paper, with a slow forefinger, andwith a studious and absorbed face. They were all leaning their arms on thecounter close together, speaking low. After a silence of a few moments, duringwhich they all looked towards him without disturbing his outward attention fromthe Jacobin editor, they resumed their conversation.            

ìIt is true what madame says,î observed Jacques Three. ìWhy stop? There isgreat force in that. Why stop?î            

ìWell, well,î reasoned Defarge, ìbut one must stop somewhere. After all, thequestion is still where?î            

ìAt extermination,î said madame.            

ìMagnificent!î croaked Jacques Three. The Vengeance, also, highlyapproved.            

ìExtermination is good doctrine, my wife,î said Defarge, rather troubled; ìingeneral, I say nothing against it. But this Doctor has suffered much; you haveseen him to-day; you have observed his face when the paper was read.î            

ìI have observed his face!î repeated madame, contemptuously and angrily. ìYes.I have observed his face. I have observed his face to be not the face of a truefriend of the Republic. Let him take care of his face!î            

ìAnd you have observed, my wife,î said Defarge, in a deprecatory manner, ìtheanguish of his daughter, which must be a dreadful anguish to him!î            

ìI have observed his daughter,î repeated madame; ìyes, I have observed hisdaughter, more times than one. I have observed her to-day, and I have observedher other days. I have observed her in the court, and I have observed her in thestreet by the prison. Let me but lift my fingeró!î She seemed to raise it (thelistenerís eyes were always on his paper), and to let it fall with a rattle onthe ledge before her, as if the axe had dropped.            

ìThe citizeness is superb!î croaked the Juryman.            

ìShe is an Angel!î said The Vengeance, and embraced her.            

ìAs to thee,î pursued madame, implacably, addressing her husband, ìif itdepended on theeówhich, happily, it does notóthou wouldst rescue this man evennow.î            

ìNo!î protested Defarge. ìNot if to lift this glass would do it! But I wouldleave the matter there. I say, stop there.î            

ìSee you then, Jacques,î said Madame Defarge, wrathfully; ìand see you, too,my little Vengeance; see you both! Listen! For other crimes as tyrants andoppressors, I have this race a long time on my register, doomed to destructionand extermination. Ask my husband, is that so.î            

ìIt is so,î assented Defarge, without being asked.            

ìIn the beginning of the great days, when the Bastille falls, he finds thispaper of to-day, and he brings it home, and in the middle of the night when thisplace is clear and shut, we read it, here on this spot, by the light of thislamp. Ask him, is that so.î            

ìIt is so,î assented Defarge.            

ìThat night, I tell him, when the paper is read through, and the lamp is burntout, and the day is gleaming in above those shutters and between those ironbars, that I have now a secret to communicate. Ask him, is that so.î            

ìIt is so,î assented Defarge again.            

ìI communicate to him that secret. I smite this bosom with these two hands asI smite it now, and I tell him, ëDefarge, I was brought up among the fishermenof the sea-shore, and that peasant family so injured by the two Evremondebrothers, as that Bastille paper describes, is my family. Defarge, that sisterof the mortally wounded boy upon the ground was my sister, that husband was mysisterís husband, that unborn child was their child, that brother was mybrother, that father was my father, those dead are my dead, and that summons toanswer for those things descends to me!í Ask him, is that so.î            

ìIt is so,î assented Defarge once more.            

ìThen tell Wind and Fire where to stop,î returned madame; ìbut donít tellme.î            

Both her hearers derived a horrible enjoyment from the deadly nature of herwrathóthe listener could feel how white she was, without seeing heróand bothhighly commended it. Defarge, a weak minority, interposed a few words for thememory of the compassionate wife of the Marquis; but only elicited from his ownwife a repetition of her last reply. ìTell the Wind and the Fire where to stop;not me!î            

Customers entered, and the group was broken up. The English customer paid forwhat he had had, perplexedly counted his change, and asked, as a stranger, to bedirected towards the National Palace. Madame Defarge took him to the door, andput her arm on his, in pointing out the road. The English customer was notwithout his reflections then, that it might be a good deed to seize that arm,lift it, and strike under it sharp and deep.            

But, he went his way, and was soon swallowed up in the shadow of the prisonwall. At the appointed hour, he emerged from it to present himself in Mr.Lorryís room again, where he found the old gentleman walking to and fro inrestless anxiety. He said he had been with Lucie until just now, and had onlyleft her for a few minutes, to come and keep his appointment. Her father had notbeen seen, since he quitted the banking-house towards four oíclock. She had somefaint hopes that his mediation might save Charles, but they were very slight. Hehad been more than five hours gone: where could he be?            

Mr. Lorry waited until ten; but, Doctor Manette not returning, and he beingunwilling to leave Lucie any longer, it was arranged that he should go back toher, and come to the banking-house again at midnight. In the meanwhile, Cartonwould wait alone by the fire for the Doctor.            

He waited and waited, and the clock struck twelve; but Doctor Manette did notcome back. Mr. Lorry returned, and found no tidings of him, and brought none.Where could he be?            

They were discussing this question, and were almost building up some weakstructure of hope on his prolonged absence, when they heard him on the stairs.The instant he entered the room, it was plain that all was lost.            

Whether he had really been to any one, or whether he had been all that timetraversing the streets, was never known. As he stood staring at them, they askedhim no question, for his face told them everything.            

ìI cannot find it,î said he, ìand I must have it. Where is it?î            

His head and throat were bare, and, as he spoke with a helpless look strayingall around, he took his coat off, and let it drop on the floor.            

ìWhere is my bench? I have been looking everywhere for my bench, and I canítfind it. What have they done with my work? Time presses: I must finish thoseshoes.î            

They looked at one another, and their hearts died within them.            

ìCome, come!î said he, in a whimpering miserable way; ìlet me get to work.Give me my work.î            

Receiving no answer, he tore his hair, and beat his feet upon the ground, likea distracted child.            

ìDonít torture a poor forlorn wretch,î he implored them, with a dreadful cry;ìbut give me my work! What is to become of us, if those shoes are not doneto-night?î            

Lost, utterly lost!            

It was so clearly beyond hope to reason with him, or try to restore him,thatóas if by agreementóthey each put a hand upon his shoulder, and soothed himto sit down before the fire, with a promise that he should have his workpresently. He sank into the chair, and brooded over the embers, and shed tears.As if all that had happened since the garret time were a momentary fancy, or adream, Mr. Lorry saw him shrink into the exact figure that Defarge had had inkeeping.            

Affected, and impressed with terror as they both were, by this spectacle ofruin, it was not a time to yield to such emotions. His lonely daughter, bereftof her final hope and reliance, appealed to them both too strongly. Again, as ifby agreement, they looked at one another with one meaning in their faces. Cartonwas the first to speak:            

ìThe last chance is gone: it was not much. Yes; he had better be taken to her.But, before you go, will you, for a moment, steadily attend to me? Donít ask mewhy I make the stipulations I am going to make, and exact the promise I am goingto exact; I have a reasonóa good one.î            

ìI do not doubt it,î answered Mr. Lorry. ìSay on.î            

The figure in the chair between them, was all the time monotonously rockingitself to and fro, and moaning. They spoke in such a tone as they would haveused if they had been watching by a sick-bed in the night.            

Carton stooped to pick up the coat, which lay almost entangling his feet. Ashe did so, a small case in which the Doctor was accustomed to carry the lists ofhis dayís duties, fell lightly on the floor. Carton took it up, and there was afolded paper in it. ìWe should look at this!î he said. Mr. Lorry nodded hisconsent. He opened it, and exclaimed, ìThank GOD!î            

ìWhat is it?î asked Mr. Lorry, eagerly.            

ìA moment! Let me speak of it in its place. First,î he put his hand in hiscoat, and took another paper from it, ìthat is the certificate which enables meto pass out of this city. Look at it. You seeóSydney Carton, anEnglishman?î            

Mr. Lorry held it open in his hand, gazing in his earnest face.            

ìKeep it for me until to-morrow. I shall see him to-morrow, you remember, andI had better not take it into the prison.î            

ìWhy not?            

ìI donít know; I prefer not to do so. Now, take this paper that Doctor Manettehas carried about him. It is a similar certificate, enabling him and hisdaughter and her child, at any time, to pass the barrier and the frontier! Yousee?î            

ìYes!î            

ìPerhaps he obtained it as his last and utmost precaution against evil,yesterday. When is it dated? But no matter; donít stay to look; put it upcarefully with mine and your own. Now, observe! I never doubted until withinthis hour or two, that he had, or could have such a paper. It is good, untilrecalled. But it may be soon recalled, and, I have reason to think, willbe.î            

ìThey are not in danger?î            

ìThey are in great danger. They are in danger of denunciation by MadameDefarge. I know it from her own lips. I have overheard words of that womanís,to-night, which have presented their danger to me in strong colours. I have lostno time, and since then, I have seen the spy. He confirms me. He knows that awood-sawyer, living by the prison wall, is under the control of the Defarges,and has been rehearsed by Madame Defarge as to his having seen Herîóhe nevermentioned Lucieís nameóîmaking signs and signals to prisoners. It is easy toforesee that the pretence will be the common one, a prison plot, and that itwill involve her lifeóand perhaps her childísóand perhaps her fatherísófor bothhave been seen with her at that place. Donít look so horrified. You will savethem all.î            

ìHeaven grant I may, Carton! But how?î            

ìI am going to tell you how. It will depend on you, and it could depend on nobetter man. This new denunciation will certainly not take place until afterto-morrow; probably not until two or three days afterwards; more probably a weekafterwards. You know it is a capital crime, to mourn for, or sympathise with, avictim of the Guillotine. She and her father would unquestionably be guilty ofthis crime, and this woman (the inveteracy of whose pursuit cannot be described)would wait to add that strength to her case, and make herself doubly sure. Youfollow me?î            

ìSo attentively, and with so much confidence in what you say, that for themoment I lose sight,î touching the back of the Doctorís chair, ìeven of thisdistress.î            

ìYou have money, and can buy the means of travelling to the seacoast asquickly as the journey can be made. Your preparations have been completed forsome days, to return to England. Early to-morrow have your horses ready, so thatthey may be in starting trim at two oíclock in the afternoon.î            

ìIt shall be done!î            

His manner was so fervent and inspiring, that Mr. Lorry caught the flame, andwas as quick as youth.            

ìYou are a noble heart. Did I say we could depend upon no better man? Tellher, to-night, what you know of her danger as involving her child and herfather. Dwell upon that, for she would lay her own fair head beside herhusbandís cheerfully.î He faltered for an instant; then went on as before. ìForthe sake of her child and her father, press upon her the necessity of leavingParis, with them and you, at that hour. Tell her that it was her husbandís lastarrangement. Tell her that more depends upon it than she dare believe, or hope.You think that her father, even in this sad state, will submit himself to her;do you not?î            

ìI am sure of it.î            

ìI thought so. Quietly and steadily have all these arrangements made in thecourtyard here, even to the taking of your own seat in the carriage. The momentI come to you, take me in, and drive away.î            

ìI understand that I wait for you under all circumstances?î            

ìYou have my certificate in your hand with the rest, you know, and willreserve my place. Wait for nothing but to have my place occupied, and then forEngland!î            

ìWhy, then,î said Mr. Lorry, grasping his eager but so firm and steady hand,ìit does not all depend on one old man, but I shall have a young and ardent manat my side.î            

ìBy the help of Heaven you shall! Promise me solemnly that nothing willinfluence you to alter the course on which we now stand pledged to oneanother.î            

ìNothing, Carton.î            

ìRemember these words to-morrow: change the course, or delay in itófor anyreasonóand no life can possibly be saved, and many lives must inevitably besacrificed.î            

ìI will remember them. I hope to do my part faithfully.î            

ìAnd I hope to do mine. Now, good bye!î            

Though he said it with a grave smile of earnestness, and though he even putthe old manís hand to his lips, he did not part from him then. He helped him sofar to arouse the rocking figure before the dying embers, as to get a cloak andhat put upon it, and to tempt it forth to find where the bench and work werehidden that it still moaningly besought to have. He walked on the other side ofit and protected it to the courtyard of the house where the afflicted heartósohappy in the memorable time when he had revealed his own desolate heart toitóoutwatched the awful night. He entered the courtyard and remained there for afew moments alone, looking up at the light in the window of her room. Before hewent away, he breathed a blessing towards it, and a Farewell.            

In the black prison of the Conciergerie, the doomed of the day awaited theirfate. They were in number as the weeks of the year. Fifty-two were to roll thatafternoon on the life-tide of the city to the boundless everlasting sea. Beforetheir cells were quit of them, new occupants were appointed; before their bloodran into the blood spilled yesterday, the blood that was to mingle with theirsto-morrow was already set apart.            

Two score and twelve were told off. From the farmer-general of seventy, whoseriches could not buy his life, to the seamstress of twenty, whose poverty andobscurity could not save her. Physical diseases, engendered in the vices andneglects of men, will seize on victims of all degrees; and the frightful moraldisorder, born of unspeakable suffering, intolerable oppression, and heartlessindifference, smote equally without distinction.            

Charles Darnay, alone in a cell, had sustained himself with no flatteringdelusion since he came to it from the Tribunal. In every line of the narrativehe had heard, he had heard his condemnation. He had fully comprehended that nopersonal influence could possibly save him, that he was virtually sentenced bythe millions, and that units could avail him nothing.            

Nevertheless, it was not easy, with the face of his beloved wife fresh beforehim, to compose his mind to what it must bear. His hold on life was strong, andit was very, very hard, to loosen; by gradual efforts and degrees unclosed alittle here, it clenched the tighter there; and when he brought his strength tobear on that hand and it yielded, this was closed again. There was a hurry, too,in all his thoughts, a turbulent and heated working of his heart, that contendedagainst resignation. If, for a moment, he did feel resigned, then his wife andchild who had to live after him, seemed to protest and to make it a selfishthing.            

But, all this was at first. Before long, the consideration that there was nodisgrace in the fate he must meet, and that numbers went the same roadwrongfully, and trod it firmly every day, sprang up to stimulate him. Nextfollowed the thought that much of the future peace of mind enjoyable by the dearones, depended on his quiet fortitude. So, by degrees he calmed into the betterstate, when he could raise his thoughts much higher, and draw comfortdown.            

Before it had set in dark on the night of his condemnation, he had travelledthus far on his last way. Being allowed to purchase the means of writing, and alight, he sat down to write until such time as the prison lamps should beextinguished.            

He wrote a long letter to Lucie, showing her that he had known nothing of herfatherís imprisonment, until he had heard of it from herself, and that he hadbeen as ignorant as she of his fatherís and uncleís responsibility for thatmisery, until the paper had been read. He had already explained to her that hisconcealment from herself of the name he had relinquished, was the oneconditionófully intelligible nowóthat her father had attached to theirbetrothal, and was the one promise he had still exacted on the morning of theirmarriage. He entreated her, for her fatherís sake, never to seek to know whetherher father had become oblivious of the existence of the paper, or had had itrecalled to him (for the moment, or for good), by the story of the Tower, onthat old Sunday under the dear old plane-tree in the garden. If he had preservedany definite remembrance of it, there could be no doubt that he had supposed itdestroyed with the Bastille, when he had found no mention of it among the relicsof prisoners which the populace had discovered there, and which had beendescribed to all the world. He besought heróthough he added that he knew it wasneedlessóto console her father, by impressing him through every tender means shecould think of, with the truth that he had done nothing for which he couldjustly reproach himself, but had uniformly forgotten himself for their jointsakes. Next to her preservation of his own last grateful love and blessing, andher overcoming of her sorrow, to devote herself to their dear child, he adjuredher, as they would meet in Heaven, to comfort her father.            

To her father himself, he wrote in the same strain; but, he told her fatherthat he expressly confided his wife and child to his care. And he told him this,very strongly, with the hope of rousing him from any despondency or dangerousretrospect towards which he foresaw he might be tending.            

To Mr. Lorry, he commended them all, and explained his worldly affairs. Thatdone, with many added sentences of grateful friendship and warm attachment, allwas done. He never thought of Carton. His mind was so full of the others, thathe never once thought of him.            

He had time to finish these letters before the lights were put out. When helay down on his straw bed, he thought he had done with this world.            

But, it beckoned him back in his sleep, and showed itself in shining forms.Free and happy, back in the old house in Soho (though it had nothing in it likethe real house), unaccountably released and light of heart, he was with Lucieagain, and she told him it was all a dream, and he had never gone away. A pauseof forgetfulness, and then he had even suffered, and had come back to her, deadand at peace, and yet there was no difference in him. Another pause of oblivion,and he awoke in the sombre morning, unconscious where he was or what hadhappened, until it flashed upon his mind, ìthis is the day of my death!î            

Thus, had he come through the hours, to the day when the fifty-two heads wereto fall. And now, while he was composed, and hoped that he could meet the endwith quiet heroism, a new action began in his waking thoughts, which was verydifficult to master.            

He had never seen the instrument that was to terminate his life. How high itwas from the ground, how many steps it had, where he would be stood, how hewould be touched, whether the touching hands would be dyed red, which way hisface would be turned, whether he would be the first, or might be the last: theseand many similar questions, in nowise directed by his will, obtruded themselvesover and over again, countless times. Neither were they connected with fear: hewas conscious of no fear. Rather, they originated in a strange besetting desireto know what to do when the time came; a desire gigantically disproportionate tothe few swift moments to which it referred; a wondering that was more like thewondering of some other spirit within his, than his own.            

The hours went on as he walked to and fro, and the clocks struck the numbershe would never hear again. Nine gone for ever, ten gone for ever, eleven gonefor ever, twelve coming on to pass away. After a hard contest with thateccentric action of thought which had last perplexed him, he had got the betterof it. He walked up and down, softly repeating their names to himself. The worstof the strife was over. He could walk up and down, free from distractingfancies, praying for himself and for them.            

Twelve gone for ever.            

He had been apprised that the final hour was Three, and he knew he would besummoned some time earlier, inasmuch as the tumbrils jolted heavily and slowlythrough the streets. Therefore, he resolved to keep Two before his mind, as thehour, and so to strengthen himself in the interval that he might be able, afterthat time, to strengthen others.            

Walking regularly to and fro with his arms folded on his breast, a verydifferent man from the prisoner, who had walked to and fro at La Force, he heardOne struck away from him, without surprise. The hour had measured like mostother hours. Devoutly thankful to Heaven for his recovered self-possession, hethought, ìThere is but another now,î and turned to walk again.            

Footsteps in the stone passage outside the door. He stopped.            

The key was put in the lock, and turned. Before the door was opened, or as itopened, a man said in a low voice, in English: ìHe has never seen me here; Ihave kept out of his way. Go you in alone; I wait near. Lose no time!î            

The door was quickly opened and closed, and there stood before him face toface, quiet, intent upon him, with the light of a smile on his features, and acautionary finger on his lip, Sydney Carton.            

There was something so bright and remarkable in his look, that, for the firstmoment, the prisoner misdoubted him to be an apparition of his own imagining.But, he spoke, and it was his voice; he took the prisonerís hand, and it was hisreal grasp.            

ìOf all the people upon earth, you least expected to see me?î he said.            

ìI could not believe it to be you. I can scarcely believe it now. You arenotîóthe apprehension came suddenly into his mindóîa prisoner?î            

ìNo. I am accidentally possessed of a power over one of the keepers here, andin virtue of it I stand before you. I come from heróyour wife, dearDarnay.î            

The prisoner wrung his hand.            

ìI bring you a request from her.î            

ìWhat is it?î            

ìA most earnest, pressing, and emphatic entreaty, addressed to you in the mostpathetic tones of the voice so dear to you, that you well remember.î            

The prisoner turned his face partly aside.            

ìYou have no time to ask me why I bring it, or what it means; I have no timeto tell you. You must comply with itótake off those boots you wear, and draw onthese of mine.î            

There was a chair against the wall of the cell, behind the prisoner. Carton,pressing forward, had already, with the speed of lightning, got him down intoit, and stood over him, barefoot.            

ìDraw on these boots of mine. Put your hands to them; put your will to them.Quick!î            

ìCarton, there is no escaping from this place; it never can be done. You willonly die with me. It is madness.î            

ìIt would be madness if I asked you to escape; but do I? When I ask you topass out at that door, tell me it is madness and remain here. Change that cravatfor this of mine, that coat for this of mine. While you do it, let me take thisribbon from your hair, and shake out your hair like this of mine!î            

With wonderful quickness, and with a strength both of will and action, thatappeared quite supernatural, he forced all these changes upon him. The prisonerwas like a young child in his hands.            

ìCarton! Dear Carton! It is madness. It cannot be accomplished, it never canbe done, it has been attempted, and has always failed. I implore you not to addyour death to the bitterness of mine.î            

ìDo I ask you, my dear Darnay, to pass the door? When I ask that, refuse.There are pen and ink and paper on this table. Is your hand steady enough towrite?î            

ìIt was when you came in.î            

ìSteady it again, and write what I shall dictate. Quick, friend,quick!î            

Pressing his hand to his bewildered head, Darnay sat down at the table.Carton, with his right hand in his breast, stood close beside him.            

ìWrite exactly as I speak.î            

ìTo whom do I address it?î            

ìTo no one.î Carton still had his hand in his breast.            

ìDo I date it?î            

ìNo.î            

The prisoner looked up, at each question. Carton, standing over him with hishand in his breast, looked down.            

ìëIf you remember,íì said Carton, dictating, ìëthe words that passed betweenus, long ago, you will readily comprehend this when you see it. You do rememberthem, I know. It is not in your nature to forget them.íì            

He was drawing his hand from his breast; the prisoner chancing to look up inhis hurried wonder as he wrote, the hand stopped, closing upon something.            

ìHave you written ëforget themí?î Carton asked.            

ìI have. Is that a weapon in your hand?î            

ìNo; I am not armed.î            

ìWhat is it in your hand?î            

ìYou shall know directly. Write on; there are but a few words more.î Hedictated again. ìëI am thankful that the time has come, when I can prove them.That I do so is no subject for regret or grief.íì As he said these words withhis eyes fixed on the writer, his hand slowly and softly moved down close to thewriterís face.            

The pen dropped from Darnayís fingers on the table, and he looked about himvacantly.            

ìWhat vapour is that?î he asked.            

ìVapour?î            

ìSomething that crossed me?î            

ìI am conscious of nothing; there can be nothing here. Take up the pen andfinish. Hurry, hurry!î            

As if his memory were impaired, or his faculties disordered, the prisoner madean effort to rally his attention. As he looked at Carton with clouded eyes andwith an altered manner of breathing, Cartonóhis hand again in his breastólookedsteadily at him.            

ìHurry, hurry!î            

The prisoner bent over the paper, once more.            

ìëIf it had been otherwise;íì Cartonís hand was again watchfully and softlystealing down; ìëI never should have used the longer opportunity. If it had beenotherwise;íì the hand was at the prisonerís face; ìëI should but have had somuch the more to answer for. If it had been otherwiseóíì Carton looked at thepen and saw it was trailing off into unintelligible signs.            

Cartonís hand moved back to his breast no more. The prisoner sprang up with areproachful look, but Cartonís hand was close and firm at his nostrils, andCartonís left arm caught him round the waist. For a few seconds he faintlystruggled with the man who had come to lay down his life for him; but, within aminute or so, he was stretched insensible on the ground.            

Quickly, but with hands as true to the purpose as his heart was, Cartondressed himself in the clothes the prisoner had laid aside, combed back hishair, and tied it with the ribbon the prisoner had worn. Then, he softly called,ìEnter there! Come in!î and the Spy presented himself.            

ìYou see?î said Carton, looking up, as he kneeled on one knee beside theinsensible figure, putting the paper in the breast: ìis your hazard verygreat?î            

ìMr. Carton,î the Spy answered, with a timid snap of his fingers, ìmy hazardis not THAT, in the thick of business here, if you are true to the whole of yourbargain.î            

ìDonít fear me. I will be true to the death.î            

ìYou must be, Mr. Carton, if the tale of fifty-two is to be right. Being maderight by you in that dress, I shall have no fear.î            

ìHave no fear! I shall soon be out of the way of harming you, and the restwill soon be far from here, please God! Now, get assistance and take me to thecoach.î            

ìYou?î said the Spy nervously.            

ìHim, man, with whom I have exchanged. You go out at the gate by which youbrought me in?î            

ìOf course.î            

ìI was weak and faint when you brought me in, and I am fainter now you take meout. The parting interview has overpowered me. Such a thing has happened here,often, and too often. Your life is in your own hands. Quick! Callassistance!î            

ìYou swear not to betray me?î said the trembling Spy, as he paused for a lastmoment.            

ìMan, man!î returned Carton, stamping his foot; ìhave I sworn by no solemn vowalready, to go through with this, that you waste the precious moments now? Takehim yourself to the courtyard you know of, place him yourself in the carriage,show him yourself to Mr. Lorry, tell him yourself to give him no restorative butair, and to remember my words of last night, and his promise of last night, anddrive away!î            

The Spy withdrew, and Carton seated himself at the table, resting his foreheadon his hands. The Spy returned immediately, with two men.            

ìHow, then?î said one of them, contemplating the fallen figure. ìSo afflictedto find that his friend has drawn a prize in the lottery of SainteGuillotine?î            

ìA good patriot,î said the other, ìcould hardly have been more afflicted ifthe Aristocrat had drawn a blank.î            

They raised the unconscious figure, placed it on a litter they had brought tothe door, and bent to carry it away.            

ìThe time is short, Evremonde,î said the Spy, in a warning voice.            

ìI know it well,î answered Carton. ìBe careful of my friend, I entreat you,and leave me.î            

ìCome, then, my children,î said Barsad. ìLift him, and come away!î            

The door closed, and Carton was left alone. Straining his powers of listeningto the utmost, he listened for any sound that might denote suspicion or alarm.There was none. Keys turned, doors clashed, footsteps passed along distantpassages: no cry was raised, or hurry made, that seemed unusual. Breathing morefreely in a little while, he sat down at the table, and listened again until theclock struck Two.            

Sounds that he was not afraid of, for he divined their meaning, then began tobe audible. Several doors were opened in succession, and finally his own. Agaoler, with a list in his hand, looked in, merely saying, ìFollow me,Evremonde!î and he followed into a large dark room, at a distance. It was a darkwinter day, and what with the shadows within, and what with the shadows without,he could but dimly discern the others who were brought there to have their armsbound. Some were standing; some seated. Some were lamenting, and in restlessmotion; but, these were few. The great majority were silent and still, lookingfixedly at the ground.            

As he stood by the wall in a dim corner, while some of the fifty-two werebrought in after him, one man stopped in passing, to embrace him, as having aknowledge of him. It thrilled him with a great dread of discovery; but the manwent on. A very few moments after that, a young woman, with a slight girlishform, a sweet spare face in which there was no vestige of colour, and largewidely opened patient eyes, rose from the seat where he had observed hersitting, and came to speak to him.            

ìCitizen Evremonde,î she said, touching him with her cold hand. ìI am a poorlittle seamstress, who was with you in La Force.î            

He murmured for answer: ìTrue. I forget what you were accused of?î            

ìPlots. Though the just Heaven knows that I am innocent of any. Is it likely?Who would think of plotting with a poor little weak creature like me?î            

The forlorn smile with which she said it, so touched him, that tears startedfrom his eyes.            

ìI am not afraid to die, Citizen Evremonde, but I have done nothing. I am notunwilling to die, if the Republic which is to do so much good to us poor, willprofit by my death; but I do not know how that can be, Citizen Evremonde. Such apoor weak little creature!î            

As the last thing on earth that his heart was to warm and soften to, it warmedand softened to this pitiable girl.            

ìI heard you were released, Citizen Evremonde. I hoped it was true?î            

ìIt was. But, I was again taken and condemned.î            

ìIf I may ride with you, Citizen Evremonde, will you let me hold your hand? Iam not afraid, but I am little and weak, and it will give me morecourage.î            

As the patient eyes were lifted to his face, he saw a sudden doubt in them,and then astonishment. He pressed the work-worn, hunger-worn young fingers, andtouched his lips.            

ìAre you dying for him?î she whispered.            

ìAnd his wife and child. Hush! Yes.î            

ìO you will let me hold your brave hand, stranger?î            

ìHush! Yes, my poor sister; to the last.î            

 * * *            

The same shadows that are falling on the prison, are falling, in that samehour of the early afternoon, on the Barrier with the crowd about it, when acoach going out of Paris drives up to be examined.            

ìWho goes here? Whom have we within? Papers!î            

The papers are handed out, and read.            

ìAlexandre Manette. Physician. French. Which is he?î            

This is he; this helpless, inarticulately murmuring, wandering old man pointedout.            

ìApparently the Citizen-Doctor is not in his right mind? The Revolution-feverwill have been too much for him?î            

Greatly too much for him.            

ìHah! Many suffer with it. Lucie. His daughter. French. Which is she?î            

This is she.            

ìApparently it must be. Lucie, the wife of Evremonde; is it not?î            

It is.            

ìHah! Evremonde has an assignation elsewhere. Lucie, her child. English. Thisis she?î            

She and no other.            

ìKiss me, child of Evremonde. Now, thou hast kissed a good Republican;something new in thy family; remember it! Sydney Carton. Advocate. English.Which is he?î            

He lies here, in this corner of the carriage. He, too, is pointed out.            

ìApparently the English advocate is in a swoon?î            

It is hoped he will recover in the fresher air. It is represented that he isnot in strong health, and has separated sadly from a friend who is under thedispleasure of the Republic.            

ìIs that all? It is not a great deal, that! Many are under the displeasure ofthe Republic, and must look out at the little window. Jarvis Lorry. Banker.English. Which is he?î            

ìI am he. Necessarily, being the last.î            

It is Jarvis Lorry who has replied to all the previous questions. It is JarvisLorry who has alighted and stands with his hand on the coach door, replying to agroup of officials. They leisurely walk round the carriage and leisurely mountthe box, to look at what little luggage it carries on the roof; thecountry-people hanging about, press nearer to the coach doors and greedily starein; a little child, carried by its mother, has its short arm held out for it,that it may touch the wife of an aristocrat who has gone to theGuillotine.            

ìBehold your papers, Jarvis Lorry, countersigned.î            

ìOne can depart, citizen?î            

ìOne can depart. Forward, my postilions! A good journey!î            

ìI salute you, citizens.óAnd the first danger passed!î            

These are again the words of Jarvis Lorry, as he clasps his hands, and looksupward. There is terror in the carriage, there is weeping, there is the heavybreathing of the insensible traveller.            

ìAre we not going too slowly? Can they not be induced to go faster?î asksLucie, clinging to the old man.            

ìIt would seem like flight, my darling. I must not urge them too much; itwould rouse suspicion.î            

ìLook back, look back, and see if we are pursued!î            

ìThe road is clear, my dearest. So far, we are not pursued.î            

Houses in twos and threes pass by us, solitary farms, ruinous buildings,dye-works, tanneries, and the like, open country, avenues of leafless trees. Thehard uneven pavement is under us, the soft deep mud is on either side.Sometimes, we strike into the skirting mud, to avoid the stones that clatter usand shake us; sometimes, we stick in ruts and sloughs there. The agony of ourimpatience is then so great, that in our wild alarm and hurry we are for gettingout and runningóhidingódoing anything but stopping.            

Out of the open country, in again among ruinous buildings, solitary farms,dye-works, tanneries, and the like, cottages in twos and threes, avenues ofleafless trees. Have these men deceived us, and taken us back by another road?Is not this the same place twice over? Thank Heaven, no. A village. Look back,look back, and see if we are pursued! Hush! the posting-house.            

Leisurely, our four horses are taken out; leisurely, the coach stands in thelittle street, bereft of horses, and with no likelihood upon it of ever movingagain; leisurely, the new horses come into visible existence, one by one;leisurely, the new postilions follow, sucking and plaiting the lashes of theirwhips; leisurely, the old postilions count their money, make wrong additions,and arrive at dissatisfied results. All the time, our overfraught hearts arebeating at a rate that would far outstrip the fastest gallop of the fastesthorses ever foaled.            

At length the new postilions are in their saddles, and the old are leftbehind. We are through the village, up the hill, and down the hill, and on thelow watery grounds. Suddenly, the postilions exchange speech with animatedgesticulation, and the horses are pulled up, almost on their haunches. We arepursued?            

ìHo! Within the carriage there. Speak then!î            

ìWhat is it?î asks Mr. Lorry, looking out at window.            

ìHow many did they say?î            

ìI do not understand you.î            

ìóAt the last post. How many to the Guillotine to-day?î            

ìFifty-two.î            

ìI said so! A brave number! My fellow-citizen here would have it forty-two;ten more heads are worth having. The Guillotine goes handsomely. I love it. Hiforward. Whoop!î            

The night comes on dark. He moves more; he is beginning to revive, and tospeak intelligibly; he thinks they are still together; he asks him, by his name,what he has in his hand. O pity us, kind Heaven, and help us! Look out, lookout, and see if we are pursued.            

The wind is rushing after us, and the clouds are flying after us, and the moonis plunging after us, and the whole wild night is in pursuit of us; but, so far,we are pursued by nothing else.            

In that same juncture of time when the Fifty-Two awaited their fate MadameDefarge held darkly ominous council with The Vengeance and Jacques Three of theRevolutionary Jury. Not in the wine-shop did Madame Defarge confer with theseministers, but in the shed of the wood-sawyer, erst a mender of roads. Thesawyer himself did not participate in the conference, but abided at a littledistance, like an outer satellite who was not to speak until required, or tooffer an opinion until invited.            

ìBut our Defarge,î said Jacques Three, ìis undoubtedly a good Republican?Eh?î            

ìThere is no better,î the voluble Vengeance protested in her shrill notes, ìinFrance.î            

ìPeace, little Vengeance,î said Madame Defarge, laying her hand with a slightfrown on her lieutenantís lips, ìhear me speak. My husband, fellow-citizen, is agood Republican and a bold man; he has deserved well of the Republic, andpossesses its confidence. But my husband has his weaknesses, and he is so weakas to relent towards this Doctor.î            

ìIt is a great pity,î croaked Jacques Three, dubiously shaking his head, withhis cruel fingers at his hungry mouth; ìit is not quite like a good citizen; itis a thing to regret.î            

ìSee you,î said madame, ìI care nothing for this Doctor, I. He may wear hishead or lose it, for any interest I have in him; it is all one to me. But, theEvremonde people are to be exterminated, and the wife and child must follow thehusband and father.î            

ìShe has a fine head for it,î croaked Jacques Three. ìI have seen blue eyesand golden hair there, and they looked charming when Samson held them up.î Ogrethat he was, he spoke like an epicure.            

Madame Defarge cast down her eyes, and reflected a little.            

ìThe child also,î observed Jacques Three, with a meditative enjoyment of hiswords, ìhas golden hair and blue eyes. And we seldom have a child there. It is apretty sight!î            

ìIn a word,î said Madame Defarge, coming out of her short abstraction, ìIcannot trust my husband in this matter. Not only do I feel, since last night,that I dare not confide to him the details of my projects; but also I feel thatif I delay, there is danger of his giving warning, and then they mightescape.î            

ìThat must never be,î croaked Jacques Three; ìno one must escape. We have nothalf enough as it is. We ought to have six score a day.î            

ìIn a word,î Madame Defarge went on, ìmy husband has not my reason forpursuing this family to annihilation, and I have not his reason for regardingthis Doctor with any sensibility. I must act for myself, therefore. Come hither,little citizen.î            

The wood-sawyer, who held her in the respect, and himself in the submission,of mortal fear, advanced with his hand to his red cap.            

ìTouching those signals, little citizen,î said Madame Defarge, sternly, ìthatshe made to the prisoners; you are ready to bear witness to them this veryday?î            

ìAy, ay, why not!î cried the sawyer. ìEvery day, in all weathers, from two tofour, always signalling, sometimes with the little one, sometimes without. Iknow what I know. I have seen with my eyes.î            

He made all manner of gestures while he spoke, as if in incidental imitationof some few of the great diversity of signals that he had never seen.            

ìClearly plots,î said Jacques Three. ìTransparently!î            

ìThere is no doubt of the Jury?î inquired Madame Defarge, letting her eyesturn to him with a gloomy smile.            

ìRely upon the patriotic Jury, dear citizeness. I answer for myfellow-Jurymen.î            

ìNow, let me see,î said Madame Defarge, pondering again. ìYet once more! Can Ispare this Doctor to my husband? I have no feeling either way. Can I sparehim?î            

ìHe would count as one head,î observed Jacques Three, in a low voice. ìWereally have not heads enough; it would be a pity, I think.î            

ìHe was signalling with her when I saw her,î argued Madame Defarge; ìI cannotspeak of one without the other; and I must not be silent, and trust the casewholly to him, this little citizen here. For, I am not a bad witness.î            

The Vengeance and Jacques Three vied with each other in their ferventprotestations that she was the most admirable and marvellous of witnesses. Thelittle citizen, not to be outdone, declared her to be a celestialwitness.            

ìHe must take his chance,î said Madame Defarge. ìNo, I cannot spare him! Youare engaged at three oíclock; you are going to see the batch of to-dayexecuted.óYou?î            

The question was addressed to the wood-sawyer, who hurriedly replied in theaffirmative: seizing the occasion to add that he was the most ardent ofRepublicans, and that he would be in effect the most desolate of Republicans, ifanything prevented him from enjoying the pleasure of smoking his afternoon pipein the contemplation of the droll national barber. He was so very demonstrativeherein, that he might have been suspected (perhaps was, by the dark eyes thatlooked contemptuously at him out of Madame Defargeís head) of having his smallindividual fears for his own personal safety, every hour in the day.             

ìI,î said madame, ìam equally engaged at the same place. After it is overósayat eight to-nightócome you to me, in Saint Antoine, and we will give informationagainst these people at my Section.î            

The wood-sawyer said he would be proud and flattered to attend the citizeness.The citizeness looking at him, he became embarrassed, evaded her glance as asmall dog would have done, retreated among his wood, and hid his confusion overthe handle of his saw.            

Madame Defarge beckoned the Juryman and The Vengeance a little nearer to thedoor, and there expounded her further views to them thus:            

ìShe will now be at home, awaiting the moment of his death. She will bemourning and grieving. She will be in a state of mind to impeach the justice ofthe Republic. She will be full of sympathy with its enemies. I will go toher.î            

ìWhat an admirable woman; what an adorable woman!î exclaimed Jacques Three,rapturously. ìAh, my cherished!î cried The Vengeance; and embraced her.            

ìTake you my knitting,î said Madame Defarge, placing it in her lieutenantíshands, ìand have it ready for me in my usual seat. Keep me my usual chair. Goyou there, straight, for there will probably be a greater concourse than usual,to-day.î            

ìI willingly obey the orders of my Chief,î said The Vengeance with alacrity,and kissing her cheek. ìYou will not be late?î            

ìI shall be there before the commencement.î            

ìAnd before the tumbrils arrive. Be sure you are there, my soul,î said TheVengeance, calling after her, for she had already turned into the street,ìbefore the tumbrils arrive!î            

Madame Defarge slightly waved her hand, to imply that she heard, and might berelied upon to arrive in good time, and so went through the mud, and round thecorner of the prison wall. The Vengeance and the Juryman, looking after her asshe walked away, were highly appreciative of her fine figure, and her superbmoral endowments.            

There were many women at that time, upon whom the time laid a dreadfullydisfiguring hand; but, there was not one among them more to be dreaded than thisruthless woman, now taking her way along the streets. Of a strong and fearlesscharacter, of shrewd sense and readiness, of great determination, of that kindof beauty which not only seems to impart to its possessor firmness andanimosity, but to strike into others an instinctive recognition of thosequalities; the troubled time would have heaved her up, under any circumstances.But, imbued from her childhood with a brooding sense of wrong, and an inveteratehatred of a class, opportunity had developed her into a tigress. She wasabsolutely without pity. If she had ever had the virtue in her, it had quitegone out of her.            

It was nothing to her, that an innocent man was to die for the sins of hisforefathers; she saw, not him, but them. It was nothing to her, that his wifewas to be made a widow and his daughter an orphan; that was insufficientpunishment, because they were her natural enemies and her prey, and as such hadno right to live. To appeal to her, was made hopeless by her having no sense ofpity, even for herself. If she had been laid low in the streets, in any of themany encounters in which she had been engaged, she would not have pitiedherself; nor, if she had been ordered to the axe to-morrow, would she have goneto it with any softer feeling than a fierce desire to change places with the manwho sent here there.            

Such a heart Madame Defarge carried under her rough robe. Carelessly worn, itwas a becoming robe enough, in a certain weird way, and her dark hair lookedrich under her coarse red cap. Lying hidden in her bosom, was a loaded pistol.Lying hidden at her waist, was a sharpened dagger. Thus accoutred, and walkingwith the confident tread of such a character, and with the supple freedom of awoman who had habitually walked in her girlhood, bare-foot and bare-legged, onthe brown sea-sand, Madame Defarge took her way along the streets.            

Now, when the journey of the travelling coach, at that very moment waiting forthe completion of its load, had been planned out last night, the difficulty oftaking Miss Pross in it had much engaged Mr. Lorryís attention. It was notmerely desirable to avoid overloading the coach, but it was of the highestimportance that the time occupied in examining it and its passengers, should bereduced to the utmost; since their escape might depend on the saving of only afew seconds here and there. Finally, he had proposed, after anxiousconsideration, that Miss Pross and Jerry, who were at liberty to leave the city,should leave it at three oíclock in the lightest- wheeled conveyance known tothat period. Unencumbered with luggage, they would soon overtake the coach, and,passing it and preceding it on the road, would order its horses in advance, andgreatly facilitate its progress during the precious hours of the night, whendelay was the most to be dreaded.            

Seeing in this arrangement the hope of rendering real service in that pressingemergency, Miss Pross hailed it with joy. She and Jerry had beheld the coachstart, had known who it was that Solomon brought, had passed some ten minutes intortures of suspense, and were now concluding their arrangements to follow thecoach, even as Madame Defarge, taking her way through the streets, now drewnearer and nearer to the else-deserted lodging in which they held theirconsultation.            

ìNow what do you think, Mr. Cruncher,î said Miss Pross, whose agitation was sogreat that she could hardly speak, or stand, or move, or live: ìwhat do youthink of our not starting from this courtyard? Another carriage having alreadygone from here to-day, it might awaken suspicion.î            

ìMy opinion, miss,î returned Mr. Cruncher, ìis as youíre right. Likewise wotIíll stand by you, right or wrong.î            

ìI am so distracted with fear and hope for our precious creatures,î said MissPross, wildly crying, ìthat I am incapable of forming any plan. Are YOU capableof forming any plan, my dear good Mr. Cruncher?î            

ìRespectiní a future spear oí life, miss,î returned Mr. Cruncher, ìI hope so.Respectiní any present use oí this here blessed old head oí mine, I think not.Would you do me the favour, miss, to take notice oí two promises and wows wot itis my wishes fur to record in this here crisis?î            

ìOh, for gracious sake!î cried Miss Pross, still wildly crying, ìrecord themat once, and get them out of the way, like an excellent man.î            

ìFirst,î said Mr. Cruncher, who was all in a tremble, and who spoke with anashy and solemn visage, ìthem poor things well out oí this, never no more will Ido it, never no more!î            

ìI am quite sure, Mr. Cruncher,î returned Miss Pross, ìthat you never will doit again, whatever it is, and I beg you not to think it necessary to mentionmore particularly what it is.î            

ìNo, miss,î returned Jerry, ìit shall not be named to you. Second: them poorthings well out oí this, and never no more will I interfere with Mrs. Cruncherísflopping, never no more!î            

ìWhatever housekeeping arrangement that may be,î said Miss Pross, striving todry her eyes and compose herself, ìI have no doubt it is best that Mrs. Crunchershould have it entirely under her own superintendence. óO my poordarlings!î            

ìI go so far as to say, miss, moreover,î proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with a mostalarming tendency to hold forth as from a pulpitóîand let my words be took downand took to Mrs. Cruncher through yourselfóthat wot my opinions respectiníflopping has undergone a change, and that wot I only hope with all my heart asMrs. Cruncher may be a flopping at the present time.î            

ìThere, there, there! I hope she is, my dear man,î cried the distracted MissPross, ìand I hope she finds it answering her expectations.î            

ìForbid it,î proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with additional solemnity, additionalslowness, and additional tendency to hold forth and hold out, ìas anything wot Ihave ever said or done should be wisited on my earnest wishes for them poorcreeturs now! Forbid it as we shouldnít all flop (if it was anyways conwenient)to get ëem out oí this here dismal risk! Forbid it, miss! Wot I say, for-BIDit!î This was Mr. Cruncherís conclusion after a protracted but vain endeavour tofind a better one.            

And still Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came nearer andnearer.            

ìIf we ever get back to our native land,î said Miss Pross, ìyou may rely uponmy telling Mrs. Cruncher as much as I may be able to remember and understand ofwhat you have so impressively said; and at all events you may be sure that Ishall bear witness to your being thoroughly in earnest at this dreadful time.Now, pray let us think! My esteemed Mr. Cruncher, let us think!î            

Still, Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, came nearer andnearer.            

ìIf you were to go before,î said Miss Pross, ìand stop the vehicle and horsesfrom coming here, and were to wait somewhere for me; wouldnít that bebest?î            

Mr. Cruncher thought it might be best.            

ìWhere could you wait for me?î asked Miss Pross.            

Mr. Cruncher was so bewildered that he could think of no locality but TempleBar. Alas! Temple Bar was hundreds of miles away, and Madame Defarge was drawingvery near indeed.            

ìBy the cathedral door,î said Miss Pross. ìWould it be much out of the way, totake me in, near the great cathedral door between the two towers?î            

ìNo, miss,î answered Mr. Cruncher.            

ìThen, like the best of men,î said Miss Pross, ìgo to the posting-housestraight, and make that change.î            

ìI am doubtful,î said Mr. Cruncher, hesitating and shaking his head, ìaboutleaving of you, you see. We donít know what may happen.î            

ìHeaven knows we donít,î returned Miss Pross, ìbut have no fear for me. Takeme in at the cathedral, at Three oíClock, or as near it as you can, and I amsure it will be better than our going from here. I feel certain of it. There!Bless you, Mr. Cruncher! Think-not of me, but of the lives that may depend onboth of us!î            

This exordium, and Miss Prossís two hands in quite agonised entreaty claspinghis, decided Mr. Cruncher. With an encouraging nod or two, he immediately wentout to alter the arrangements, and left her by herself to follow as she hadproposed.            

The having originated a precaution which was already in course of execution,was a great relief to Miss Pross. The necessity of composing her appearance sothat it should attract no special notice in the streets, was another relief. Shelooked at her watch, and it was twenty minutes past two. She had no time tolose, but must get ready at once.            

Afraid, in her extreme perturbation, of the loneliness of the deserted rooms,and of half-imagined faces peeping from behind every open door in them, MissPross got a basin of cold water and began laving her eyes, which were swollenand red. Haunted by her feverish apprehensions, she could not bear to have hersight obscured for a minute at a time by the dripping water, but constantlypaused and looked round to see that there was no one watching her. In one ofthose pauses she recoiled and cried out, for she saw a figure standing in theroom.            

The basin fell to the ground broken, and the water flowed to the feet ofMadame Defarge. By strange stern ways, and through much staining blood, thosefeet had come to meet that water.            

Madame Defarge looked coldly at her, and said, ìThe wife of Evremonde; whereis she?î            

It flashed upon Miss Prossís mind that the doors were all standing open, andwould suggest the flight. Her first act was to shut them. There were four in theroom, and she shut them all. She then placed herself before the door of thechamber which Lucie had occupied.            

Madame Defargeís dark eyes followed her through this rapid movement, andrested on her when it was finished. Miss Pross had nothing beautiful about her;years had not tamed the wildness, or softened the grimness, of her appearance;but, she too was a determined woman in her different way, and she measuredMadame Defarge with her eyes, every inch.            

ìYou might, from your appearance, be the wife of Lucifer,î said Miss Pross, inher breathing. ìNevertheless, you shall not get the better of me. I am anEnglishwoman.î            

Madame Defarge looked at her scornfully, but still with something of MissProssís own perception that they two were at bay. She saw a tight, hard, wirywoman before her, as Mr. Lorry had seen in the same figure a woman with a stronghand, in the years gone by. She knew full well that Miss Pross was the familyísdevoted friend; Miss Pross knew full well that Madame Defarge was the familyísmalevolent enemy.            

ìOn my way yonder,î said Madame Defarge, with a slight movement of her handtowards the fatal spot, ìwhere they reserve my chair and my knitting for me, Iam come to make my compliments to her in passing. I wish to see her.î            

ìI know that your intentions are evil,î said Miss Pross, ìand you may dependupon it, Iíll hold my own against them.î            

Each spoke in her own language; neither understood the otherís words; bothwere very watchful, and intent to deduce from look and manner, what theunintelligible words meant.            

ìIt will do her no good to keep herself concealed from me at this moment,îsaid Madame Defarge. ìGood patriots will know what that means. Let me see her.Go tell her that I wish to see her. Do you hear?î            

ìIf those eyes of yours were bed-winches,î returned Miss Pross, ìand I was anEnglish four-poster, they shouldnít loose a splinter of me. No, you wickedforeign woman; I am your match.î            

Madame Defarge was not likely to follow these idiomatic remarks in detail;but, she so far understood them as to perceive that she was set atnaught.            

ìWoman imbecile and pig-like!î said Madame Defarge, frowning. ìI take noanswer from you. I demand to see her. Either tell her that I demand to see her,or stand out of the way of the door and let me go to her!î This, with an angryexplanatory wave of her right arm.            

ìI little thought,î said Miss Pross, ìthat I should ever want to understandyour nonsensical language; but I would give all I have, except the clothes Iwear, to know whether you suspect the truth, or any part of it.î            

Neither of them for a single moment released the otherís eyes. Madame Defargehad not moved from the spot where she stood when Miss Pross first became awareof her; but, she now advanced one step.            

ìI am a Briton,î said Miss Pross, ìI am desperate. I donít care an EnglishTwopence for myself. I know that the longer I keep you here, the greater hopethere is for my Ladybird. Iíll not leave a handful of that dark hair upon yourhead, if you lay a finger on me!î            

Thus Miss Pross, with a shake of her head and a flash of her eyes betweenevery rapid sentence, and every rapid sentence a whole breath. Thus Miss Pross,who had never struck a blow in her life.            

But, her courage was of that emotional nature that it brought theirrepressible tears into her eyes. This was a courage that Madame Defarge solittle comprehended as to mistake for weakness. ìHa, ha!î she laughed, ìyou poorwretch! What are you worth! I address myself to that Doctor.î Then she raisedher voice and called out, ìCitizen Doctor! Wife of Evremonde! Child ofEvremonde! Any person but this miserable fool, answer the CitizenessDefarge!î            

Perhaps the following silence, perhaps some latent disclosure in theexpression of Miss Prossís face, perhaps a sudden misgiving apart from eithersuggestion, whispered to Madame Defarge that they were gone. Three of the doorsshe opened swiftly, and looked in.            

ìThose rooms are all in disorder, there has been hurried packing, there areodds and ends upon the ground. There is no one in that room behind you! Let melook.î            

ìNever!î said Miss Pross, who understood the request as perfectly as MadameDefarge understood the answer.            

ìIf they are not in that room, they are gone, and can be pursued and broughtback,î said Madame Defarge to herself.            

ìAs long as you donít know whether they are in that room or not, you areuncertain what to do,î said Miss Pross to herself; ìand you shall not know that,if I can prevent your knowing it; and know that, or not know that, you shall notleave here while I can hold you.î            

ìI have been in the streets from the first, nothing has stopped me, I willtear you to pieces, but I will have you from that door,î said MadameDefarge.            

ìWe are alone at the top of a high house in a solitary courtyard, we are notlikely to be heard, and I pray for bodily strength to keep you here, while everyminute you are here is worth a hundred thousand guineas to my darling,î saidMiss Pross.            

Madame Defarge made at the door. Miss Pross, on the instinct of the moment,seized her round the waist in both her arms, and held her tight. It was in vainfor Madame Defarge to struggle and to strike; Miss Pross, with the vigoroustenacity of love, always so much stronger than hate, clasped her tight, and evenlifted her from the floor in the struggle that they had. The two hands of MadameDefarge buffeted and tore her face; but, Miss Pross, with her head down, heldher round the waist, and clung to her with more than the hold of a drowningwoman.            

Soon, Madame Defargeís hands ceased to strike, and felt at her encircledwaist. ìIt is under my arm,î said Miss Pross, in smothered tones, ìyou shall notdraw it. I am stronger than you, I bless Heaven for it. I hold you till one orother of us faints or dies!î            

Madame Defargeís hands were at her bosom. Miss Pross looked up, saw what itwas, struck at it, struck out a flash and a crash, and stood aloneóblinded withsmoke.            

All this was in a second. As the smoke cleared, leaving an awful stillness, itpassed out on the air, like the soul of the furious woman whose body laylifeless on the ground.            

In the first fright and horror of her situation, Miss Pross passed the body asfar from it as she could, and ran down the stairs to call for fruitless help.Happily, she bethought herself of the consequences of what she did, in time tocheck herself and go back. It was dreadful to go in at the door again; but, shedid go in, and even went near it, to get the bonnet and other things that shemust wear. These she put on, out on the staircase, first shutting and lockingthe door and taking away the key. She then sat down on the stairs a few momentsto breathe and to cry, and then got up and hurried away.            

By good fortune she had a veil on her bonnet, or she could hardly have gonealong the streets without being stopped. By good fortune, too, she was naturallyso peculiar in appearance as not to show disfigurement like any other woman. Sheneeded both advantages, for the marks of gripping fingers were deep in her face,and her hair was torn, and her dress (hastily composed with unsteady hands) wasclutched and dragged a hundred ways.            

In crossing the bridge, she dropped the door key in the river. Arriving at thecathedral some few minutes before her escort, and waiting there, she thought,what if the key were already taken in a net, what if it were identified, what ifthe door were opened and the remains discovered, what if she were stopped at thegate, sent to prison, and charged with murder! In the midst of these flutteringthoughts, the escort appeared, took her in, and took her away.            

ìIs there any noise in the streets?î she asked him.            

ìThe usual noises,î Mr. Cruncher replied; and looked surprised by the questionand by her aspect.            

ìI donít hear you,î said Miss Pross. ìWhat do you say?î            

It was in vain for Mr. Cruncher to repeat what he said; Miss Pross could nothear him. ìSo Iíll nod my head,î thought Mr. Cruncher, amazed, ìat all eventssheíll see that.î And she did.            

ìIs there any noise in the streets now?î asked Miss Pross again,presently.            

Again Mr. Cruncher nodded his head.            

ìI donít hear it.î            

ìGone deaf in an hour?î said Mr. Cruncher, ruminating, with his mind muchdisturbed; ìwotís come to her?î            

ìI feel,î said Miss Pross, ìas if there had been a flash and a crash, and thatcrash was the last thing I should ever hear in this life.î            

ìBlest if she ainít in a queer condition!î said Mr. Cruncher, more and moredisturbed. ìWot can she have been a takiní, to keep her courage up? Hark!Thereís the roll of them dreadful carts! You can hear that, miss?î            

ìI can hear,î said Miss Pross, seeing that he spoke to her, ìnothing. O, mygood man, there was first a great crash, and then a great stillness, and thatstillness seems to be fixed and unchangeable, never to be broken any more aslong as my life lasts.î            

ìIf she donít hear the roll of those dreadful carts, now very nigh theirjourneyís end,î said Mr. Cruncher, glancing over his shoulder, ìitís my opinionthat indeed she never will hear anything else in this world.î            

And indeed she never did.            

Along the Paris streets, the death-carts rumble, hollow and harsh. Sixtumbrils carry the dayís wine to La Guillotine. All the devouring and insatiateMonsters imagined since imagination could record itself, are fused in the onerealisation, Guillotine. And yet there is not in France, with its rich varietyof soil and climate, a blade, a leaf, a root, a sprig, a peppercorn, which willgrow to maturity under conditions more certain than those that have producedthis horror. Crush humanity out of shape once more, under similar hammers, andit will twist itself into the same tortured forms. Sow the same seed ofrapacious license and oppression over again, and it will surely yield the samefruit according to its kind.            

Six tumbrils roll along the streets. Change these back again to what theywere, thou powerful enchanter, Time, and they shall be seen to be the carriagesof absolute monarchs, the equipages of feudal nobles, the toilettes of flaringJezebels, the churches that are not my fatherís house but dens of thieves, thehuts of millions of starving peasants! No; the great magician who majesticallyworks out the appointed order of the Creator, never reverses histransformations. ìIf thou be changed into this shape by the will of God,î saythe seers to the enchanted, in the wise Arabian stories, ìthen remain so! But,if thou wear this form through mere passing conjuration, then resume thy formeraspect!î Changeless and hopeless, the tumbrils roll along.            

As the sombre wheels of the six carts go round, they seem to plough up a longcrooked furrow among the populace in the streets. Ridges of faces are thrown tothis side and to that, and the ploughs go steadily onward. So used are theregular inhabitants of the houses to the spectacle, that in many windows thereare no people, and in some the occupation of the hands is not so much assuspended, while the eyes survey the faces in the tumbrils. Here and there, theinmate has visitors to see the sight; then he points his finger, with somethingof the complacency of a curator or authorised exponent, to this cart and tothis, and seems to tell who sat here yesterday, and who there the daybefore.            

Of the riders in the tumbrils, some observe these things, and all things ontheir last roadside, with an impassive stare; others, with a lingering interestin the ways of life and men. Some, seated with drooping heads, are sunk insilent despair; again, there are some so heedful of their looks that they castupon the multitude such glances as they have seen in theatres, and in pictures.Several close their eyes, and think, or try to get their straying thoughtstogether. Only one, and he a miserable creature, of a crazed aspect, is soshattered and made drunk by horror, that he sings, and tries to dance. Not oneof the whole number appeals by look or gesture, to the pity of thepeople.            

There is a guard of sundry horsemen riding abreast of the tumbrils, and facesare often turned up to some of them, and they are asked some question. It wouldseem to be always the same question, for, it is always followed by a press ofpeople towards the third cart. The horsemen abreast of that cart, frequentlypoint out one man in it with their swords. The leading curiosity is, to knowwhich is he; he stands at the back of the tumbril with his head bent down, toconverse with a mere girl who sits on the side of the cart, and holds his hand.He has no curiosity or care for the scene about him, and always speaks to thegirl. Here and there in the long street of St. Honore, cries are raised againsthim. If they move him at all, it is only to a quiet smile, as he shakes his haira little more loosely about his face. He cannot easily touch his face, his armsbeing bound.            

On the steps of a church, awaiting the coming-up of the tumbrils, stands theSpy and prison-sheep. He looks into the first of them: not there. He looks intothe second: not there. He already asks himself, ìHas he sacrificed me?î when hisface clears, as he looks into the third.            

ìWhich is Evremonde?î says a man behind him.            

ìThat. At the back there.î            

ìWith his hand in the girlís?î            

ìYes.î            

The man cries, ìDown, Evremonde! To the Guillotine all aristocrats! Down,Evremonde!î            

ìHush, hush!î the Spy entreats him, timidly.            

ìAnd why not, citizen?î            

ìHe is going to pay the forfeit: it will be paid in five minutes more. Let himbe at peace.î            

But the man continuing to exclaim, ìDown, Evremonde!î the face of Evremonde isfor a moment turned towards him. Evremonde then sees the Spy, and looksattentively at him, and goes his way.            

The clocks are on the stroke of three, and the furrow ploughed among thepopulace is turning round, to come on into the place of execution, and end. Theridges thrown to this side and to that, now crumble in and close behind the lastplough as it passes on, for all are following to the Guillotine. In front of it,seated in chairs, as in a garden of public diversion, are a number of women,busily knitting. On one of the fore-most chairs, stands The Vengeance, lookingabout for her friend.            

ìTherese!î she cries, in her shrill tones. ìWho has seen her? ThereseDefarge!î            

ìShe never missed before,î says a knitting-woman of the sisterhood.            

ìNo; nor will she miss now,î cries The Vengeance, petulantly.ìTherese.î            

ìLouder,î the woman recommends.            

Ay! Louder, Vengeance, much louder, and still she will scarcely hear thee.Louder yet, Vengeance, with a little oath or so added, and yet it will hardlybring her. Send other women up and down to seek her, lingering somewhere; andyet, although the messengers have done dread deeds, it is questionable whetherof their own wills they will go far enough to find her!            

ìBad Fortune!î cries The Vengeance, stamping her foot in the chair, ìand hereare the tumbrils! And Evremonde will be despatched in a wink, and she not here!See her knitting in my hand, and her empty chair ready for her. I cry withvexation and disappointment!î            

As The Vengeance descends from her elevation to do it, the tumbrils begin todischarge their loads. The ministers of Sainte Guillotine are robed and ready.Crash!óA head is held up, and the knitting-women who scarcely lifted their eyesto look at it a moment ago when it could think and speak, count One.            

The second tumbril empties and moves on; the third comes up. Crash! óAnd theknitting-women, never faltering or pausing in their Work, count Two.            

The supposed Evremonde descends, and the seamstress is lifted out next afterhim. He has not relinquished her patient hand in getting out, but still holds itas he promised. He gently places her with her back to the crashing engine thatconstantly whirrs up and falls, and she looks into his face and thankshim.            

ìBut for you, dear stranger, I should not be so composed, for I am naturally apoor little thing, faint of heart; nor should I have been able to raise mythoughts to Him who was put to death, that we might have hope and comfort hereto-day. I think you were sent to me by Heaven.î            

ìOr you to me,î says Sydney Carton. ìKeep your eyes upon me, dear child, andmind no other object.î            

ìI mind nothing while I hold your hand. I shall mind nothing when I let it go,if they are rapid.î            

ìThey will be rapid. Fear not!î            

The two stand in the fast-thinning throng of victims, but they speak as ifthey were alone. Eye to eye, voice to voice, hand to hand, heart to heart, thesetwo children of the Universal Mother, else so wide apart and differing, havecome together on the dark highway, to repair home together, and to rest in herbosom.            

ìBrave and generous friend, will you let me ask you one last question? I amvery ignorant, and it troubles meójust a little.î            

ìTell me what it is.î            

ìI have a cousin, an only relative and an orphan, like myself, whom I lovevery dearly. She is five years younger than I, and she lives in a farmerís housein the south country. Poverty parted us, and she knows nothing of my fateófor Icannot writeóand if I could, how should I tell her! It is better as itis.î            

ìYes, yes: better as it is.î            

ìWhat I have been thinking as we came along, and what I am still thinking now,as I look into your kind strong face which gives me so much support, is this:óIf the Republic really does good to the poor, and they come to be less hungry,and in all ways to suffer less, she may live a long time: she may even live tobe old.î            

ìWhat then, my gentle sister?î            

ìDo you think:î the uncomplaining eyes in which there is so much endurance,fill with tears, and the lips part a little more and tremble: ìthat it will seemlong to me, while I wait for her in the better land where I trust both you and Iwill be mercifully sheltered?î            

ìIt cannot be, my child; there is no Time there, and no trouble there.î            

ìYou comfort me so much! I am so ignorant. Am I to kiss you now? Is the momentcome?î            

ìYes.î            

She kisses his lips; he kisses hers; they solemnly bless each other. The sparehand does not tremble as he releases it; nothing worse than a sweet, brightconstancy is in the patient face. She goes next before himóis gone; theknitting-women count Twenty-Two.            

ìI am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord: he that believeth in me,though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in meshall never die.î            

The murmuring of many voices, the upturning of many faces, the pressing on ofmany footsteps in the outskirts of the crowd, so that it swells forward in amass, like one great heave of water, all flashes away. Twenty-Three.            

* * *            

They said of him, about the city that night, that it was the peacefullestmanís face ever beheld there. Many added that he looked sublime andprophetic.            

One of the most remarkable sufferers by the same axeóa womanóhad asked at thefoot of the same scaffold, not long before, to be allowed to write down thethoughts that were inspiring her. If he had given any utterance to his, and theywere prophetic, they would have been these:            

ìI see Barsad, and Cly, Defarge, The Vengeance, the Juryman, the Judge, longranks of the new oppressors who have risen on the destruction of the old,perishing by this retributive instrument, before it shall cease out of itspresent use. I see a beautiful city and a brilliant people rising from thisabyss, and, in their struggles to be truly free, in their triumphs and defeats,through long years to come, I see the evil of this time and of the previous timeof which this is the natural birth, gradually making expiation for itself andwearing out.            

ìI see the lives for which I lay down my life, peaceful, useful, prosperousand happy, in that England which I shall see no more. I see Her with a childupon her bosom, who bears my name. I see her father, aged and bent, butotherwise restored, and faithful to all men in his healing office, and at peace.I see the good old man, so long their friend, in ten yearsí time enriching themwith all he has, and passing tranquilly to his reward.            

ìI see that I hold a sanctuary in their hearts, and in the hearts of theirdescendants, generations hence. I see her, an old woman, weeping for me on theanniversary of this day. I see her and her husband, their course done, lyingside by side in their last earthly bed, and I know that each was not morehonoured and held sacred in the otherís soul, than I was in the souls ofboth.            

ìI see that child who lay upon her bosom and who bore my name, a man winninghis way up in that path of life which once was mine. I see him winning it sowell, that my name is made illustrious there by the light of his. I see theblots I threw upon it, faded away. I see him, fore-most of just judges andhonoured men, bringing a boy of my name, with a forehead that I know and goldenhair, to this placeóthen fair to look upon, with not a trace of this dayísdisfigurementóand I hear him tell the child my story, with a tender and afaltering voice.            

ìIt is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done; it is a far,far better rest that I go to than I have ever known.î            


