 It will be seen , likewise , that this Custom-House sketch has a certain propriety , of a kind always recognized in literature , as explaining how a large portion of the following pages came into my possession , and as offering proofs of the authenticity of a narrative therein contained .
 This , in fact—a desire to put myself in my true position as editor , or very little more , of the most prolix among the tales that make up my volume , —this , and no other , is my true reason for assuming a personal relation with the public .
 In accomplishing the main purpose , it has appeared allowable , by a few extra touches , to give a faint representation of a mode of life not heretofore described , together with some of the characters that move in it , among whom the author happened to make one .
 
.
 But the sentiment has likewise its moral quality .
 The figure of that first ancestor , invested by family tradition with a dim and dusky grandeur , was present to my boyish imagination , as far back as I can remember .
 It still haunts me , and induces a sort of home-feeling with the past , which I scarcely claim in reference to the present phase of the town .
 I seem to have a stronger claim to a residence here on account of this grave , bearded , sable-cloaked , and steeple-crowned progenitor , —who came so early , with his Bible and his sword , and trode the unworn street with such a stately port , and made so large a figure , as a man of war and peace , —a stronger claim than for myself , whose name is seldom heard and my face hardly known .
 He was a soldier , legislator , judge .
 he was a ruler in the Church .
 he had all the Puritanic traits , both good and evil .
 He was likewise a bitter persecutor .
 as witness the Quakers , who have remembered him in their histories , and relate an incident of his hard severity towards a woman of their sect , which will last longer , it is to be feared , than any record of his better deeds , although these were many .
 His son , too , inherited the persecuting spirit , and made himself so conspicuous in the martyrdom of the witches , that their blood may fairly be said to have left a stain upon him .
 So deep a stain , indeed , that his old dry bones , in the Charter Street burial-ground , must still retain it , if they have not crumbled utterly to dust .
 I know not whether these ancestors of mine bethought themselves to repent , and ask pardon of Heaven for their cruelties .
 or whether they are now groaning under the heavy consequences of them , in another state of being .
 At all events , I , the present writer , as their representative , hereby take shame upon myself for their sakes , and pray that any curse incurred by them—as I have heard , and as the dreary and unprosperous condition of the race , for many a long year back , would argue to exist—may be now and henceforth removed .
 
.
 The discovery was soon made , I imagine , that the new Surveyor had no great harm in him .
 So with lightsome hearts , and the happy consciousness of being usefully employed , —in their own behalf , at least , if not for our beloved country , —these good old gentlemen went through the various formalities of office .
 Sagaciously , under their spectacles , did they peep into the holds of vessels .
 Mighty was their fuss about little matters , and marvellous , sometimes , the obtuseness that allowed greater ones to slip between their fingers .
 Whenever such a mischance occurred , —when a wagon-load of valuable merchandise had been smuggled ashore , at noonday , perhaps , and directly beneath their unsuspicious noses , —nothing could exceed the vigilance and alacrity with which they proceeded to lock , and double-lock , and secure with tape and sealing-wax , all the avenues of the delinquent vessel .
 Instead of a reprimand for their previous negligence , the case seemed rather to require an eulogium on their praiseworthy caution , after the mischief had happened .
 a grateful recognition of the promptitude of their zeal , the moment that there was no longer any remedy .
 
.
 Unless people are more than commonly disagreeable , it is my foolish habit to contract a kindness for them .
 The better part of my companion’s character , if it have a better part , is that which usually comes uppermost in my regard , and forms the type whereby I recognize the man .
 As most of these old Custom-House officers had good traits , and as my position in reference to them , being paternal and protective , was favorable to the growth of friendly sentiments , I soon grew to like them all .
 It was pleasant , in the summer forenoons , —when the fervent heat , that almost liquefied the rest of the human family , merely communicated a genial warmth to their half-torpid systems , —it was pleasant to hear them chatting in the back entry , a row of them all tipped against the wall , as usual .
 while the frozen witticisms of past generations were thawed out , and came bubbling with laughter from their lips .
 Externally , the jollity of aged men has much in common with the mirth of children .
 the intellect , any more than a deep sense of humor , has little to do with the matter .
 it is , with both , a gleam that plays upon the surface , and imparts a sunny and cheery aspect alike to the green branch , and gray , mouldering trunk .
 In one case , however , it is real sunshine .
 in the other , it more resembles the phosphorescent glow of decaying wood .
 
.
 It would be sad injustice , the reader must understand , to represent all my excellent old friends as in their dotage .
 In the first place , my coadjutors were not invariably old .
 there were men among them in their strength and prime , of marked ability and energy , and altogether superior to the sluggish and dependent mode of life on which their evil stars had cast them .
 Then , moreover , the white locks of age were sometimes found to be the thatch of an intellectual tenement in good repair .
 But , as respects the majority of my corps of veterans , there will be no wrong done , if I characterize them generally as a set of wearisome old souls , who had gathered nothing worth preservation from their varied experience of life .
 They seemed to have flung away all the golden grain of practical wisdom , which they had enjoyed so many opportunities of harvesting , and most carefully to have stored their memories with the husks .
 They spoke with far more interest and unction of their morning’s breakfast , or yesterday’s , to-day’s , or to-morrow’s dinner , than of the shipwreck of forty or fifty years ago , and all the world’s wonders which they had witnessed with their youthful eyes .
 
.
 One point , in which he had vastly the advantage over his four-footed brethren , was his ability to recollect the good dinners which it had made no small portion of the happiness of his life to eat .
 His gourmandism was a highly agreeable trait .
 and to hear him talk of roast-meat was as appetizing as a pickle or an oyster .
 As he possessed no higher attribute , and neither sacrificed nor vitiated any spiritual endowment by devoting all his energies and ingenuities to subserve the delight and profit of his maw , it always pleased and satisfied me to hear him expatiate on fish , poultry , and butcher’s meat , and the most eligible methods of preparing them for the table .
 His reminiscences of good cheer , however ancient the date of the actual banquet , seemed to bring the savor of pig or turkey under one’s very nostrils .
 There were flavors on his palate , that had lingered there not less than sixty or seventy years , and were still apparently as fresh as that of the mutton-chop which he had just devoured for his breakfast .
 I have heard him smack his lips over dinners , every guest at which , except himself , had long been food for worms .
 It was marvellous to observe how the ghosts of bygone meals were continually rising up before him .
 not in anger or retribution , but as if grateful for his former appreciation , and seeking to reduplicate an endless series of enjoyment , at once shadowy and sensual .
 A tenderloin of beef , a hind-quarter of veal , a spare-rib of pork , a particular chicken , or a remarkably praiseworthy turkey , which had perhaps adorned his board in the days of the elder Adams , would be remembered .
 while all the subsequent experience of our race , and all the events that brightened or darkened his individual career , had gone over him with as little permanent effect as the passing breeze .
 The chief tragic event of the old man’s life , so far as I could judge , was his mishap with a certain goose , which lived and died some twenty or forty years ago .
 a goose of most promising figure , but which , at table , proved so inveterately tough that the carving-knife would make no impression on its carcass .
 and it could only be divided with an axe and handsaw .
 
.
 But it is time to quit this sketch .
 on which , however , I should be glad to dwell at considerably more length , because , of all men whom I have ever known , this individual was fittest to be a Custom-House officer .
 Most persons , owing to causes which I may not have space to hint at , suffer moral detriment from this peculiar mode of life .
 The old Inspector was incapable of it , and , were he to continue in office to the end of time , would be just as good as he was then , and sit down to dinner with just as good an appetite .
 
.
 Nevertheless , looking at the old warrior with affection , —for , slight as was the communication between us , my feeling towards him , like that of all bipeds and quadrupeds who knew him , might not improperly be termed so , — I could discern the main points of his portrait .
 It was marked with the noble and heroic qualities which showed it to be not by a mere accident , but of good right , that he had won a distinguished name .
 His spirit could never , I conceive , have been characterized by an uneasy activity .
 it must , at any period of his life , have required an impulse to set him in motion .
 but , once stirred up , with obstacles to overcome , and an adequate object to be attained , it was not in the man to give out or fail .
 The heat that had formerly pervaded his nature , and which was not yet extinct , was never of the kind that flashes and flickers in a blaze , but , rather , a deep , red glow , as of iron in a furnace .
 Weight , solidity , firmness .
 this was the expression of his repose , even in such decay as had crept untimely over him , at the period of which I speak .
 But I could imagine , even then , that , under some excitement which should go deeply into his consciousness , —roused by a trumpet-peal , loud enough to awaken all of his energies that were not dead , but only slumbering , —he was yet capable of flinging off his infirmities like a sick man’s gown , dropping the staff of age to seize a battle-sword , and starting up once more a warrior .
 And , in so intense a moment , his demeanour would have still been calm .
 Such an exhibition , however , was but to be pictured in fancy .
 not to be anticipated , nor desired .
 What I saw in him—as evidently as the indestructible ramparts of Old Ticonderoga , already cited as the most appropriate simile—were the features of stubborn and ponderous endurance , which might well have amounted to obstinacy in his earlier days .
 of integrity , that , like most of his other endowments , lay in a somewhat heavy mass , and was just as unmalleable and unmanageable as a ton of iron ore .
 and of benevolence , which , fiercely , as he led the bayonets on at Chippewa or Fort Erie , I take to be of quite as genuine a stamp as what actuates any or all the polemical philanthropists of the age .
 He had slain men with his own hand , for aught I know .
 —certainly , they had fallen , like blades of grass at the sweep of the scythe , before the charge to which his spirit imparted its triumphant energy .
 —but , be that as it might , there was never in his heart so much cruelty as would have brushed the down off a butterfly’s wing .
 I have not known the man , to whose innate kindliness I would more confidently make an appeal .
 
.
 Meanwhile , there I was , a Surveyor of the Revenue , and , so far as I have been able to understand , as good a Surveyor as need be .
 A man of thought , fancy , and sensibility , had he ten times the Surveyor’s proportion of those qualities ,  may , at any time , be a man of affairs , if he will only choose to give himself the trouble .
 My fellow-officers , and the merchants and sea-captains with whom my official duties brought me into any manner of connection , viewed me in no other light , and probably knew me in no other character .
 None of them , I presume , had ever read a page of my inditing , or would have cared a fig the more for me , if they had read them all .
 nor would it have mended the matter , in the least , had those same unprofitable pages been written with a pen like that of Burns or of Chaucer , each of whom was a Custom-House officer in his day , as well as I .
 It is a good lesson—though it may often be a hard one—for a man who has dreamed of literary fame , and of making for himself a rank among the world’s dignitaries by such means , to step aside out of the narrow circle in which his claims are recognized , and to find how utterly devoid of significance , beyond that circle , is all that he achieves , and all he aims at .
 I know not that I especially needed the lesson , either in the way of warning or rebuke .
 but , at any rate , I learned it thoroughly .
 nor , it gives me pleasure to reflect , did the truth , as it came home to my perception , ever cost me a pang , or require to be thrown off in a sigh .
 In the way of literary talk , it is true , the Naval Officer—an excellent fellow , who came into office with me , and went out only a little later—would often engage me in a discussion about one or the other of his favorite topics , Napoleon or Shakspeare .
 The Collector’s junior clerk , too , —a young gentleman who , it was whispered , occasionally covered a sheet of Uncle Sam’s letter-paper with what , at the distance of a few yards ,  looked very much like poetry , —used now and then to speak to me of books , as matters with which I might possibly be conversant .
 This was my all of lettered intercourse .
 and it was quite sufficient for my necessities .
 
.
 But the past was not dead .
 Once in a great while , the thoughts , that had seemed so vital and so active , yet had been put to rest so quietly , revived again .
 One of the most remarkable occasions , when the habit of by-gone days awoke in me , was that which brings it within the law of literary propriety to offer the public the sketch which I am now writing .
 
.
 Prior to the Revolution , there is a dearth of records .
 the earlier documents and archives of the Custom-House having , probably , been carried off to Halifax , when all the King’s officials accompanied the British army in its flight from Boston .
 It has often been a matter of regret with me .
 for , going back , perhaps , to the days of the Protectorate , those papers must have contained many references to forgotten or remembered men , and to antique customs , which would have affected me with the same pleasure as when I used to pick up Indian arrow-heads in the field near the Old Manse .
 
.
 But , for myself , during the whole of my Custom-House experience , moonlight and sunshine , and the glow of fire-light , were just alike in my regard .
 and neither of them was of one whit more avail than the twinkle of a tallow-candle .
 An entire class of susceptibilities , and a gift connected with them , —of no great richness or value , but the best I had , —was gone from me .
 
.
 It is my belief , however , that , had I attempted a different order of composition , my faculties would not have been found so pointless and inefficacious .
 I might , for instance , have contented myself with writing out the narratives of a veteran ship-master , one of the Inspectors , whom I should be most ungrateful not to mention .
 since scarcely a day passed that he did not stir me to laughter and admiration by his marvellous gifts as a story-teller .
 Could I have preserved the picturesque force of his style , and the humorous coloring which nature taught him how to throw over his descriptions , the result , I honestly believe , would have been something new in literature .
 Or I might readily have found a more serious task .
 It was a folly , with the materiality of this daily life pressing so intrusively upon me , to attempt to fling myself back into another age .
 or to insist on creating the semblance of a world out of airy matter , when , at every moment , the impalpable beauty of my soap-bubble was broken by the rude contact of some actual circumstance .
 The wiser effort would have been , to diffuse thought and imagination through the opaque substance of to-day , and thus to make it a bright transparency .
 to spiritualize the burden that began to weigh so heavily .
 to seek , resolutely , the true and indestructible value that lay hidden in the petty and wearisome incidents , and ordinary characters , with which I was now conversant .
 The fault was mine .
 The page of life that was spread out before me seemed dull and commonplace , only because I had not fathomed its deeper import .
 A better book than I shall ever write was there .
 leaf after leaf presenting itself to me , just as it was written out by the reality of the flitting hour , and vanishing as fast as written , only because my brain wanted the insight and my hand the cunning to transcribe it .
 At some future day , it may be , I shall remember a few scattered fragments and broken paragraphs , and write them down , and find the letters turn to gold upon the page .
 
.
 In short , unpleasant as was my predicament , at best , I saw much reason to congratulate myself that I was on the losing side , rather than the triumphant one .
 If , heretofore , I had been none of the warmest of partisans , I began now , at this season of peril and adversity , to be pretty acutely sensible with which party my predilections lay .
 nor was it without something like regret and shame , that , according to a reasonable calculation of chances , I saw my own prospect of retaining office to be better than those of my Democratic brethren .
 But who can see an inch into futurity , beyond his nose .
 My own head was the first that fell .
 
.
 A throng of bearded men , in sad-colored garments and gray , steeple-crowned hats , intermixed with women , some wearing hoods , and others bareheaded , was assembled in front of a wooden edifice , the door of which was heavily timbered with oak , and studded with iron spikes .
 
.
 Goodwives ,  said a hard-featured dame of fifty , I’ll tell ye a piece of my mind .
 It would be greatly for the public behoof , if we women , being of mature age and church-members in good repute , should have the handling of such malefactresses as this Hester Prynne .
 What think ye , gossips .
 If the hussy stood up for judgment before us five , that are now here in a knot together , would she come off with such a sentence as the worshipful magistrates have awarded .
 Marry , I trow not .
 
.
 People say ,  said another , that the Reverend Master Dimmesdale , her godly pastor , takes it very grievously to heart that such a scandal should have come upon his congregation .
 
.
 Ah , but ,  interposed , more softly , a young wife , holding a child by the hand , let her cover the mark as she will , the pang of it will be always in her heart .
 
.
 What do we talk of marks and brands , whether on the bodice of her gown , or the flesh of her forehead .
  cried another female , the ugliest as well as the most pitiless of these self-constituted judges .
 This woman has brought shame upon us all , and ought to die .
 Is there not law for it .
 Truly there is , both in the Scripture and the statute-book .
 Then let the magistrates , who have made it of no effect , thank themselves if their own wives and daughters go astray .
 
.
 The young woman was tall , with a figure of perfect elegance , on a large scale .
 She had dark and abundant hair , so glossy that it threw off the sunshine with a gleam , and a face which , besides being beautiful from regularity of feature and richness of complexion , had the impressiveness belonging to a marked brow and deep black eyes .
 She was lady-like , too , after the manner of the feminine gentility of those days .
 characterized by a certain state and dignity , rather than by the delicate , evanescent , and indescribable grace , which is now recognized as its indication .
 And never had Hester Prynne appeared more lady-like , in the antique interpretation of the term , than as she issued from the prison .
 Those who had before known her , and had expected to behold her dimmed and obscured by a disastrous cloud , were astonished , and even startled , to perceive how her beauty shone out , and made a halo of the misfortune and ignominy in which she was enveloped .
 It may be true , that , to a sensitive observer , there was something exquisitely painful in it .
 Her attire , which , indeed , she had wrought for the occasion , in prison , and had modelled much after her own fancy , seemed to express the attitude of her spirit , the desperate recklessness of her mood , by its wild and picturesque peculiarity .
 But the point which drew all eyes , and , as it were , transfigured the wearer , —so that both men and women , who had been familiarly acquainted with Hester Prynne , were now impressed as if they beheld her for the first time , —was that Scarlet Letter , so fantastically embroidered and illuminated upon her bosom .
 It had the effect of a spell , taking her out of the ordinary relations with humanity , and inclosing her in a sphere by herself .
 
.
 It were well ,  muttered the most iron-visaged of the old dames , if we stripped Madam Hester’s rich gown off her dainty shoulders .
 and as for the red letter , which she hath stitched so curiously , I’ll bestow a rag of mine own rheumatic flannel , to make a fitter one .
 
.
 O , peace , neighbours , peace .
  whispered their youngest companion .
 Do not let her hear you .
 Not a stitch in that embroidered letter , but she has felt it in her heart .
 
.
 The grim beadle now made a gesture with his staff .
 
.
 In fact , this scaffold constituted a portion of a penal machine , which now , for two or three generations past , has been merely historical and traditionary among us , but was held , in the old time , to be as effectual an agent in the promotion of good citizenship , as ever was the guillotine among the terrorists of France .
 It was , in short , the platform of the pillory .
 and above it rose the framework of that instrument of discipline , so fashioned as to confine the human head in its tight grasp , and thus hold it up to the public gaze .
 The very idea of ignominy was embodied and made manifest in this contrivance of wood and iron .
 There can be no outrage , methinks , against our common nature—whatever be the delinquencies of the individual , —no outrage more flagrant than to forbid the culprit to hide his face for shame .
 as it was the essence of this punishment to do .
 In Hester Prynne’s instance , however , as not unfrequently in other cases , her sentence bore , that she should stand a certain time upon the platform , but without undergoing that gripe about the neck and confinement of the head , the proneness to which was the most devilish characteristic of this ugly engine .
 Knowing well her part , she ascended a flight of wooden steps , and was thus displayed to the surrounding multitude , at about the height of a man’s shoulders above the street .
 
.
 The scene was not without a mixture of awe , such as must always invest the spectacle of guilt and shame in a fellow-creature , before society shall have grown corrupt enough to smile , instead of shuddering , at it .
 The witnesses of Hester Prynne’s disgrace had not yet passed beyond their simplicity .
 They were stern enough to look upon her death , had that been the sentence , without a murmur at its severity , but had none of the heartlessness of another social state , which would find only a theme for jest in an exhibition like the present .
 Even had there been a disposition to turn the matter into ridicule , it must have been repressed and overpowered by the solemn presence of men no less dignified than the Governor , and several of his counsellors , a judge , a general , and the ministers of the town .
 all of whom sat or stood in a balcony of the meeting-house , looking down upon the platform .
 When such personages could constitute a part of the spectacle , without risking the majesty or reverence of rank and office , it was safely to be inferred that the infliction of a legal sentence would have an earnest and effectual meaning .
 Accordingly , the crowd was sombre and grave .
 The unhappy culprit sustained herself as best a woman might , under the heavy weight of a thousand unrelenting eyes , all fastened upon her , and concentred at her bosom .
 It was almost intolerable to be borne .
 Of an impulsive and passionate nature , she had fortified herself to encounter the stings and venomous stabs of public contumely , wreaking itself in every variety of insult .
 but there was a quality so much more terrible in the solemn mood of the popular mind , that she longed rather to behold all those rigid countenances contorted with scornful merriment , and herself the object .
 Had a roar of laughter burst from the multitude , —each man , each woman , each little shrill-voiced child , contributing their individual parts , —Hester Prynne might have repaid them all with a bitter and disdainful smile .
 But , under the leaden infliction which it was her doom to endure , she felt , at moments , as if she must needs shriek out with the full power of her lungs , and cast herself from the scaffold down upon the ground , or else go mad at once .
 
.
 He was small in stature , with a furrowed visage , which , as yet , could hardly be termed aged .
 There was a remarkable intelligence in his features , as of a person who had so cultivated his mental part that it could not fail to mould the physical to itself , and become manifest by unmistakable tokens .
 Although , by a seemingly careless arrangement of his heterogeneous garb , he had endeavoured to conceal or abate the peculiarity , it was sufficiently evident to Hester Prynne , that one of this man’s shoulders rose higher than the other .
 Again , at the first instant of perceiving that thin visage , and the slight deformity of the figure , she pressed her infant to her bosom , with so convulsive a force that the poor babe uttered another cry of pain .
 But the mother did not seem to hear it .
 
.
 I pray you , good Sir ,  said he , who is this woman .
 —and wherefore is she here set up to public shame .
 
.
 You say truly ,  replied the other .
 I am a stranger , and have been a wanderer , sorely against my will .
 I have met with grievous mishaps by sea and land , and have been long held in bonds among the heathen-folk , to the southward .
 and am now brought hither by this Indian , to be redeemed out of my captivity .
 Will it please you , therefore , to tell me of Hester Prynne’s , —have I her name rightly .
 —of this woman’s offences , and what has brought her to yonder scaffold .
 
.
 Ah .
 —aha .
 —I conceive you ,  said the stranger , with a bitter smile .
 So learned a man as you speak of should have learned this too in his books .
 And who , by your favor , Sir , may be the father of yonder babe—it is some three or four months old , I should judge—which Mistress Prynne is holding in her arms .
 
.
 Of a truth friend , that matter remaineth a riddle .
 and the Daniel who shall expound it is yet a-wanting ,  answered the townsman .
 Madam Hester absolutely refuseth to speak , and the magistrates have laid their heads together in vain .
 Peradventure the guilty one stands looking on at this sad spectacle , unknown of man , and forgetting that God sees him .
 
.
 The learned man ,  observed the stranger , with another smile , should come himself to look into the mystery .
 
.
 While this passed , Hester Prynne had been standing on her pedestal , still with a fixed gaze towards the stranger .
 so fixed a gaze , that , at moments of intense absorption , all other objects in the visible world seemed to vanish , leaving only him and her .
 Such an interview , perhaps , would have been more terrible than even to meet him as she now did , with the hot , midday sun burning down upon her face , and lighting up its shame .
 with the scarlet token of infamy on her breast .
 with the sin-born infant in her arms .
 with a whole people , drawn forth as to a festival , staring at the features that should have been seen only in the quiet gleam of the fireside , in the happy shadow of a home , or beneath a matronly veil , at church .
 Dreadful as it was , she was conscious of a shelter in the presence of these thousand witnesses .
 It was better to stand thus , with so many betwixt him and her , than to greet him , face to face , they two alone .
 She fled for refuge , as it were , to the public exposure , and dreaded the moment when its protection should be withdrawn from her .
 Involved in these thoughts , she scarcely heard a voice behind her , until it had repeated her name more than once , in a loud and solemn tone , audible to the whole multitude .
 
.
 Hearken unto me , Hester Prynne .
  said the voice .
 
.
 Good Master Dimmesdale ,  said he , the responsibility of this woman’s soul lies greatly with you .
 It behooves you , therefore , to exhort her to repentance , and to confession , as a proof and consequence thereof .
 
.
 Speak to the woman , my brother ,  said MrWilson .
 It is of moment to her soul , and therefore , as the worshipful Governor says , momentous to thine own , in whose charge hers is .
 Exhort her to confess the truth .
 
.
 The Reverend MrDimmesdale bent his head , in silent prayer , as it seemed , and then came forward .
 
.
 Hester shook her head .
 
.
 Woman , transgress not beyond the limits of Heaven’s mercy .
  cried the Reverend MrWilson , more harshly than before .
 That little babe hath been gifted with a voice , to second and confirm the counsel which thou hast heard .
 Speak out the name .
 That , and thy repentance , may avail to take the scarlet letter off thy breast .
 
.
 I will not speak .
  answered Hester , turning pale as death , but responding to this voice , which she too surely recognized .
 And my child must seek a heavenly Father .
 she shall never know an earthly one .
 
.
 She will not speak .
  murmured MrDimmesdale , who , leaning over the balcony , with his hand upon his heart , had awaited the result of his appeal .
 He now drew back , with a long respiration .
 Wondrous strength and generosity of a woman’s heart .
 She will not speak .
 
.
 Prithee , friend , leave me alone with my patient ,  said the practitioner .
 Trust me , good jailer , you shall briefly have peace in your house .
 and , I promise you , Mistress Prynne shall hereafter be more amenable to just authority than you may have found her heretofore .
 
.
 My old studies in alchemy ,  observed he , and my sojourn , for above a year past , among a people well versed in the kindly properties of simples , have made a better physician of me than many that claim the medical degree .
 Here , woman .
 The child is yours , —she is none of mine , —neither will she recognize my voice or aspect as a father’s .
 Administer this draught , therefore , with thine own hand .
 
.
 Hester repelled the offered medicine , at the same time gazing with strongly marked apprehension into his face .
 
.
 Wouldst thou avenge thyself on the innocent babe .
  whispered she .
 
.
 I have thought of death ,  said she , —have wished for it , —would even have prayed for it , were it fit that such as I should pray for any thing .
 Yet , if death be in this cup , I bid thee think again , ere thou beholdest me quaff it .
 See .
 It is even now at my lips .
 
.
 Drink , then ,  replied he , still with the same cold composure .
 Dost thou know me so little , Hester Prynne .
 Are my purposes wont to be so shallow .
 Even if I imagine a scheme of vengeance , what could I do better for my object than to let thee live , —than to give thee medicines against all harm and peril of life , —so that this burning shame may still blaze upon thy bosom .
 —As he spoke , he laid his long forefinger on the scarlet letter , which forthwith seemed to scorch into Hester’s breast , as if it had been red-hot .
 He noticed her involuntary gesture , and smiled .
 —Live , therefore , and bear about thy doom with thee , in the eyes of men and women , —in the eyes of him whom thou didst call thy husband , —in the eyes of yonder child .
 And , that thou mayest live , take off this draught .
 
.
 Thou knowest ,  said Hester , —for , depressed as she was , she could not endure this last quiet stab at the token of her shame , —thou knowest that I was frank with thee .
 I felt no love , nor feigned any .
 
.
 I have greatly wronged thee ,  murmured Hester .
 
.
 We have wronged each other ,  answered he .
 Mine was the first wrong , when I betrayed thy budding youth into a false and unnatural relation with my decay .
 Therefore , as a man who has not thought and philosophized in vain , I seek no vengeance , plot no evil against thee .
 Between thee and me , the scale hangs fairly balanced .
 But , Hester , the man lives who has wronged us both .
 Who is he .
 
.
 Ask me not .
  replied Hester Prynne , looking firmly into his face .
 That thou shalt never know .
 
.
 The eyes of the wrinkled scholar glowed so intensely upon her , that Hester Prynne clasped her hands over her heart , dreading lest he should read the secret there at once .
 
.
 Wherefore dost thou desire it .
  inquired Hester , shrinking , she hardly knew why , from this secret bond .
 Why not announce thyself openly , and cast me off at once .
 
.
 It may be ,  he replied , because I will not encounter the dishonor that besmirches the husband of a faithless woman .
 It may be for other reasons .
 Enough , it is my purpose to live and die unknown .
 Let , therefore , thy husband be to the world as one already dead , and of whom no tidings shall ever come .
 Recognize me not , by word , by sign , by look .
 Breathe not the secret , above all , to the man thou wottest of .
 Shouldst thou fail me in this , beware .
 His fame , his position , his life , will be in my hands .
 Beware .
 
.
 I will keep thy secret , as I have his ,  said Hester .
 
.
 Swear it .
  rejoined he .
 
.
 And she took the oath .
 
.
 Not thy soul ,  he answered , with another smile .
 No , not thine .
 
.
 Hester Prynne , therefore , did not flee .
 On the outskirts of the town , within the verge of the peninsula , but not in close vicinity to any other habitation , there was a small thatched cottage .
 It had been built by an earlier settler , and abandoned , because the soil about it was too sterile for cultivation , while its comparative remoteness put it out of the sphere of that social activity which already marked the habits of the emigrants .
 It stood on the shore , looking across a basin of the sea at the forest-covered hills , towards the west .
 A clump of scrubby trees , such as alone grew on the peninsula , did not so much conceal the cottage from view , as seem to denote that here was some object which would fain have been , or at least ought to be , concealed .
 In this little , lonesome dwelling , with some slender means that she possessed , and by the license of the magistrates , who still kept an inquisitorial watch over her , Hester established herself , with her infant child .
 A mystic shadow of suspicion immediately attached itself to the spot .
 Children , too young to comprehend wherefore this woman should be shut out from the sphere of human charities , would creep nigh enough to behold her plying her needle at the cottage-window , or standing in the door-way , or laboring in her little garden , or coming forth along the pathway that led townward .
 and , discerning the scarlet letter on her breast , would scamper off , with a strange , contagious fear .
 
.
 Her imagination was somewhat affected , and , had she been of a softer moral and intellectual fibre , would have been still more so , by the strange and solitary anguish of her life .
 Walking to and fro , with those lonely footsteps , in the little world with which she was outwardly connected , it now and then appeared to Hester , —if altogether fancy , it was nevertheless too potent to be resisted , —she felt or fancied , then , that the scarlet letter had endowed her with a new sense .
 She shuddered to believe , yet could not help believing , that it gave her a sympathetic knowledge of the hidden sin in other hearts .
 She was terror-stricken by the revelations that were thus made .
 What were they .
 Could they be other than the insidious whispers of the bad angel , who would fain have persuaded the struggling woman , as yet only half his victim , that the outward guise of purity was but a lie , and that , if truth were everywhere to be shown , a scarlet letter would blaze forth on many a bosom besides Hester Prynne’s .
 Or , must she receive those intimations—so obscure , yet so distinct—as truth .
 In all her miserable experience , there was nothing else so awful and so loathsome as this sense .
 It perplexed , as well as shocked her , by the irreverent inopportuneness of the occasions that brought it into vivid action .
 Sometimes , the red infamy upon her breast would give a sympathetic throb , as she passed near a venerable minister or magistrate , the model of piety and justice , to whom that age of antique reverence looked up , as to a mortal man in fellowship with angels .
 What evil thing is at hand .
  would Hester say to herself .
 Lifting her reluctant eyes , there would be nothing human within the scope of view , save the form of this earthly saint .
 Again , a mystic sisterhood would contumaciously assert itself , as she met the sanctified frown of some matron , who , according to the rumor of all tongues , had kept cold snow within her bosom throughout life .
 That unsunned snow in the matron’s bosom , and the burning shame on Hester Prynne’s , what had the two in common .
 Or , once more , the electric thrill would give her warning , —Behold , Hester , here is a companion .
 —and , looking up , she would detect the eyes of a young maiden glancing at the scarlet letter , shyly and aside , and quickly averted , with a faint , chill crimson in her cheeks .
 as if her purity were somewhat sullied by that momentary glance .
 O Fiend , whose talisman was that fatal symbol , wouldst thou leave nothing , whether in youth or age , for this poor sinner to revere .
 —Such loss of faith is ever one of the saddest results of sin .
 Be it accepted as a proof that all was not corrupt in this poor victim of her own frailty , and man’s hard law , that Hester Prynne yet struggled to believe that no fellow-mortal was guilty like herself .
 
.
 The truth was , that the little Puritans , being of the most intolerant brood that ever lived , had got a vague idea of something outlandish , unearthly , or at variance with ordinary fashions , in the mother and child .
 and therefore scorned them in their hearts , and not unfrequently reviled them with their tongues .
 Pearl felt the sentiment , and requited it with the bitterest hatred that can be supposed to rankle in a childish bosom .
 These outbreaks of a fierce temper had a kind of value , and even comfort , for her mother .
 because there was at least an intelligible earnestness in the mood , instead of the fitful caprice that so often thwarted her in the child’s manifestations .
 It appalled her , nevertheless , to discern here , again , a shadowy reflection of the evil that had existed in herself .
 All this enmity and passion had Pearl inherited , by inalienable right , out of Hester’s heart .
 Mother and daughter stood together in the same circle of seclusion from human society .
 and in the nature of the child seemed to be perpetuated those unquiet elements that had distracted Hester Prynne before Pearl’s birth , but had since begun to be soothed away by the softening influences of maternity .
 
.
 Gazing at Pearl , Hester Prynne often dropped her work upon her knees , and cried out , with an agony which she would fain have hidden , but which made utterance for itself , betwixt speech and a groan , —O Father in Heaven , —if Thou art still my Father , —what is this being which I have brought into the world .
  And Pearl , overhearing the ejaculation , or aware , through some more subtile channel , of those throbs of anguish , would turn her vivid and beautiful little face upon her mother , smile with sprite-like intelligence , and resume her play .
 
.
 Child , what art thou .
  cried the mother .
 
.
 O , I am your little Pearl .
  answered the child .
 
.
 But , while she said it , Pearl laughed and began to dance up and down , with thc humorsome gesticulation of a little imp , whose next freak might be to fly up the chimney .
 
.
 Art thou my child , in very truth .
  asked Hester .
 
.
 Nor did she put the question altogether idly , but , for the moment , with a portion of genuine earnestness .
 for , such was Pearl’s wonderful intelligence , that her mother half-doubted whether she were not acquainted with the secret spell of her existence , and might not now reveal herself .
 
.
 Tell me , mother .
  said the child , seriously , coming up to Hester , and pressing herself close to her knees .
 Do thou tell me .
 
.
 Thy Heavenly Father sent thee .
  answered Hester Prynne .
 
.
 But she said it with a hesitation that did not escape the acuteness of the child .
 Whether moved only by her ordinary freakishness , or because an evil spirit prompted her , she put up her small forefinger , and touched the scarlet letter .
 
.
 He did not send me .
  cried she , positively .
 I have no Heavenly Father .
 
.
 Tell me .
 Tell me .
  repeated Pearl , no longer seriously , but laughing , and capering about the floor .
 It is thou that must tell me .
 
.
 But Hester could not resolve the query , being herself in a dismal labyrinth of doubt .
 She remembered—betwixt a smile and a shudder—the talk of the neighbouring townspeople .
 who , seeking vainly elsewhere for the child’s paternity , and observing some of her odd attributes , had given out that poor little Pearl was a demon offspring .
 such as , ever since old Catholic times , had occasionally been seen on earth , through the agency of their mothers’ sin , and to promote some foul and wicked purpose .
 Luther , according to the scandal of his monkish enemies , was a brat of that hellish breed .
 nor was Pearl the only child to whom this inauspicious origin was assigned , among the New England Puritans .
 
.
 Another and far more important reason than the delivery of a pair of embroidered gloves impelled Hester , at this time , to seek an interview with a personage of so much power and activity in the affairs of the settlement .
 It had reached her ears , that there was a design on the part of some of the leading inhabitants , cherishing the more rigid order of principles in religion and government , to deprive her of her child .
 On the supposition that Pearl , as already hinted , was of demon origin , these good people not unreasonably argued that a Christian interest in the mother’s soul required them to remove such a stumbling-block from her path .
 If the child , on the other hand , were really capable of moral and religious growth , and possessed the elements of ultimate salvation , then , surely , it would enjoy all the fairer prospect of these advantages by being transferred to wiser and better guardianship than Hester Prynne’s .
 Among those who promoted the design , Governor Bellingham was said to be one of the most busy .
 It may appear singular , and , indeed , not a little ludicrous , that an affair of this kind , which , in later days , would have been referred to no higher jurisdiction than that of the selectmen of the town , should then have been a question publicly discussed , and on which statesmen of eminence took sides .
 At that epoch of pristine simplicity , however , matters of even slighter public interest , and of far less intrinsic weight than the welfare of Hester and her child , were strangely mixed up with the deliberations of legislators and acts of state .
 The period was hardly , if at all , earlier than that of our story , when a dispute concerning the right of property in a pig , not only caused a fierce and bitter contest in the legislative body of the colony , but resulted in an important modification of the framework itself of the legislature .
 
.
 Behold , verily , there is the woman of the scarlet letter .
 and , of a truth , moreover , there is the likeness of the scarlet letter running along by her side .
 Come , therefore , and let us fling mud at them .
 
.
 No , my little Pearl .
  said her mother .
 Thou must gather thine own sunshine .
 I have none to give thee .
 
.
 They approached the door .
 which was of an arched form , and flanked on each side by a narrow tower or projection of the edifice , in both of which were lattice-windows , with wooden shutters to close over them at need .
 Lifting the iron hammer that hung at the portal , Hester Prynne gave a summons , which was answered by one of the Governor’s bond-servants .
 a free-born Englishman , but now a seven years’ slave .
 During that term he was to be the property of his master , and as much a commodity of bargain and sale as an ox , a joint-stool .
 The serf wore the blue coat , which was the customary garb of serving-men at that period , and long before , in the old hereditary halls of England .
 
.
 Is the worshipful Governor Bellingham within .
  inquired Hester .
 
.
 Little Pearl—who was as greatly pleased with the gleaming armour as she had been with the glittering frontispiece of the house—spent some time looking into the polished mirror of the breastplate .
 
.
 Mother ,  cried she , I see you here .
 Look .
 Look .
 
.
 Hester looked , by way of humoring the child .
 and she saw that , owing to the peculiar effect of this convex mirror , the scarlet letter was represented in exaggerated and gigantic proportions , so as to be greatly the most prominent feature of her appearance .
 In truth , she seemed absolutely hidden behind it .
 Pearl pointed upward , also , at a similar picture in the head-piece .
 smiling at her mother , with the elfish intelligence that was so familiar an expression on her small physiognomy .
 That look of naughty merriment was likewise reflected in the mirror , with so much breadth and intensity of effect , that it made Hester Prynne feel as if it could not be the image of her own child , but of an imp who was seeking to mould itself into Pearl’s shape .
 
.
 Hush , child , hush .
  said her mother earnestly .
 Do not cry , dear little Pearl .
 I hear voices in the garden .
 The Governor is coming , and gentlemen along with him .
 
.
 In fact , adown the vista of the garden-avenue , a number of persons were seen approaching towards the house .
 Pearl , in utter scorn of her mother’s attempt to quiet her , gave an eldritch scream , and then became silent .
 not from any notion of obedience , but because the quick and mobile curiosity of her disposition was excited by the appearance of these new personages .
 
.
 Behind the Governor and MrWilson came two other guests .
 one , the Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale , whom the reader may remember , as having taken a brief and reluctant part in the scene of Hester Prynne’s disgrace .
 and , in close companionship with him , old Roger Chillingworth , a person of great skill in physic , who , for two or three years past , had been settled in the town .
 It was understood that this learned man was the physician as well as friend of the young minister , whose health had severely suffered , of late , by his too unreserved self-sacrifice to the labors and duties of the pastoral relation .
 
.
 The Governor , in advance of his visitors , ascended one or two steps , and , throwing open the leaves of the great hall window , found himself close to little Pearl .
 The shadow of the curtain fell on Hester Prynne , and partially concealed her .
 
.
 Ay , indeed .
  cried good old MrWilson .
 What little bird of scarlet plumage may this be .
 Methinks I have seen just such figures , when the sun has been shining through a richly painted window , and tracing out the golden and crimson images across the floor .
 But that was in the old land .
 Prithee , young one , who art thou , and what has ailed thy mother to bedizen thee in this strange fashion .
 Art thou a Christian child , —ha .
 Dost know thy catechism .
 Or art thou one of those naughty elfs or fairies , whom we thought to have left behind us , with other relics of Papistry , in merry old England .
 
.
 I am mother’s child ,  answered the scarlet vision , and my name is Pearl .
 
.
 Sayest thou so .
  cried the Governor .
 Nay , we might have judged that such a child’s mother must needs be a scarlet woman , and a worthy type of her Babylon .
 But she comes at a good time .
 and we will look into this matter forthwith .
 
.
 I can teach my little Pearl what I have learned from this .
  answered Hester Prynne , laying her finger on the red token .
 
.
 Woman , it is thy badge of shame .
  replied the stern magistrate .
 It is because of the stain which that letter indicates , that we would transfer thy child to other hands .
 
.
 Nevertheless ,  said the mother calmly , though growing more pale , this badge hath taught me , —it daily teaches me , —it is teaching me at this moment , —lessons whereof my child may be the wiser and better , albeit they can profit nothing to myself .
 
.
 We will judge warily ,  said Bellingham , and look well what we are about to do .
 Good Master Wilson , I pray you , examine this Pearl , —since that is her name , —and see whether she hath had such Christian nurture as befits a child of her age .
 
.
 Pearl ,  said he , with great solemnity , thou must take heed to instruction , that so , in due season , thou mayest wear in thy bosom the pearl of great price .
 Canst thou tell me , my child , who made thee .
 
.
 This fantasy was probably suggested by the near proximity of the Governor’s red roses , as Pearl stood outside of the window .
 together with her recollection of the prison rose-bush , which she had passed in coming hither .
 
.
 This is awful .
  cried the Governor , slowly recovering from the astonishment into which Pearl’s response had thrown him .
 Here is a child of three years old , and she cannot tell who made her .
 Without question , she is equally in the dark as to her soul , its present depravity , and future destiny .
 Methinks , gentlemen , we need inquire no further .
 
.
 Well said , again .
  cried good MrWilson .
 I feared the woman had no better thought than to make a mountebank of her child .
 
.
 You speak , my friend , with a strange earnestness ,  said old Roger Chillingworth , smiling at him .
 
.
 And there is weighty import in what my young brother hath spoken ,  added the Reverend MrWilson .
 What say you , worshipful Master Bellingham .
 Hath he not pleaded well for the poor woman .
 
.
 Indeed hath he ,  answered the magistrate , and hath adduced such arguments , that we will even leave the matter as it now stands .
 so long , at least , as there shall be no further scandal in the woman .
 Care must be had , nevertheless , to put the child to due and stated examination in the catechism at thy hands or Master Dimmesdale’s .
 Moreover , at a proper season , the tithing-men must take heed that she go both to school and to meeting .
 
.
 The little baggage hath witchcraft in her , I profess ,  said he to MrDimmesdale .
 She needs no old woman’s broomstick to fly withal .
 
.
 A strange child .
  remarked old Roger Chillingworth .
 It is easy to see the mother’s part in her .
 Would it be beyond a philosopher’s research , think ye , gentlemen , to analyze that child’s nature , and , from its make and mould , to give a shrewd guess at the father .
 
.
 Make my excuse to him , so please you .
  answered Hester , with a triumphant smile .
 I must tarry at home , and keep watch over my little Pearl .
 Had they taken her from me , I would willingly have gone with thee into the forest , and signed my name in the Black Man’s book too , and that with mine own blood .
 
.
 We shall have thee there anon .
  said the witch-lady , frowning , as she drew back her head .
 
.
 But here—if we suppose this interview betwixt Mistress Hibbins and Hester Prynne to be authentic , and not a parable—was already an illustration of the young minister’s argument against sundering the relation of a fallen mother to the offspring of her frailty .
 Even thus early had the child saved her from Satan’s snare .
 
.
 I need no medicine ,  said he .
 
.
 Nay ,  rejoined the young minister , putting his hand to his heart , with a flush of pain flitting over his brow , were I worthier to walk there , I could be better content to toil here .
 
.
 Good men ever interpret themselves too meanly ,  said the physician .
 
.
 In this manner , the mysterious old Roger Chillingworth became the medical adviser of the Reverend MrDimmesdale .
 As not only the disease interested the physician , but he was strongly moved to look into the character and qualities of the patient , these two men , so different in age , came gradually to spend much time together .
 For the sake of the minister’s health , and to enable the leech to gather plants with healing balm in them , they took long walks on the sea-shore , or in the forest .
 mingling various talk with the plash and murmur of the waves , and the solemn wind-anthem among the tree-tops .
 Often , likewise , one was the guest of the other , in his place of study and retirement .
 There was a fascination for the minister in the company of the man of science , in whom he recognized an intellectual cultivation of no moderate depth or scope .
 together with a range and freedom of ideas , that he would have vainly looked for among the members of his own profession .
 In truth , he was startled , if not shocked , to find this attribute in the physician .
 MrDimmesdale was a true priest , a true religionist , with the reverential sentiment largely developed , and an order of mind that impelled itself powerfully along the track of a creed , and wore its passage continually deeper with the lapse of time .
 In no state of society would he have been what is called a man of liberal views .
 it would always be essential to his peace to feel the pressure of a faith about him , supporting , while it confined him within its iron framework .
 Not the less , however , though with a tremulous enjoyment , did he feel the occasional relief of looking at the universe through the medium of another kind of intellect than those with which he habitually held converse .
 It was as if a window were thrown open , admitting a freer atmosphere into the close and stifled study , where his life was wasting itself away , amid lamp-light , or obstructed day-beams , and the musty fragrance , be it sensual or moral , that exhales from books .
 But the air was too fresh and chill to be long breathed , with comfort .
 So the minister , and the physician with him , withdrew again within the limits of what their church defined as orthodox .
 
.
 To sum up the matter , it grew to be a widely diffused opinion , that the Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale , like many other personages of especial sanctity , in all ages of the Christian world , was haunted either by Satan himself , or Satan’s emissary , in the guise of old Roger Chillingworth .
 This diabolical agent had the Divine permission , for a season , to burrow into the clergyman’s intimacy , and plot against his soul .
 No sensible man , it was confessed , could doubt on which side the victory would turn .
 The people looked , with an unshaken hope , to see the minister come forth out of the conflict , transfigured with the glory which he would unquestionably win .
 Meanwhile , nevertheless , it was sad to think of the perchance mortal agony through which he must struggle towards his triumph .
 
.
 Alas , to judge from the gloom and terror in the depths of the poor minister’s eyes , the battle was a sore one , and the victory any thing but secure .
 
.
 This man ,  said he , at one such moment , to himself , pure as they deem him , —all spiritual as he seems , —hath inherited a strong animal nature from his father or his mother .
 Let us dig a little farther in the direction of this vein .
 
.
 Yet MrDimmesdale would perhaps have seen this individual’s character more perfectly , if a certain morbidness , to which sick hearts are liable , had not rendered him suspicious of all mankind .
 Trusting no man as his friend , he could not recognize his enemy when the latter actually appeared .
 He therefore still kept up a familiar intercourse with him , daily receiving the old physician in his study .
 or visiting the laboratory , and , for recreation’s sake , watching the processes by which weeds were converted into drugs of potency .
 
.
 Where ,  asked he , with a look askance at them , —for it was the clergyman’s peculiarity that he seldom , now-a-days , looked straightforth at any object , whether human or inanimate , —where , my kind doctor , did you gather those herbs , with such a dark , flabby leaf .
 
.
 Perchance ,  said MrDimmesdale , he earnestly desired it , but could not .
 
.
 Then why not reveal them here .
  asked Roger Chillingworth , glancing quietly aside at the minister .
 Why should not the guilty ones sooner avail themselves of this unutterable solace .
 
.
 They mostly do ,  said the clergyman , griping hard at his breast , as if afflicted with an importunate throb of pain .
 Many , many a poor soul hath given its confidence to me , not only on the death-bed , but while strong in life , and fair in reputation .
 And ever , after such an outpouring , O , what a relief have I witnessed in those sinful brethren .
 even as in one who at last draws free air , after long stifling with his own polluted breath .
 How can it be otherwise .
 Why should a wretched man , guilty , we will say , of murder , prefer to keep the dead corpse buried in his own heart , rather than fling it forth at once , and let the universe take care of it .
 
.
 Yet some men bury their secrets thus ,  observed the calm physician .
 
.
 These men deceive themselves ,  said Roger Chillingworth , with somewhat more emphasis than usual , and making a slight gesture with his forefinger .
 They fear to take up the shame that rightfully belongs to them .
 Their love for man , their zeal for God’s service , —these holy impulses may or may not coexist in their hearts with the evil inmates to which their guilt has unbarred the door , and which must needs propagate a hellish breed within them .
 But , if they seek to glorify God , let them not lift heavenward their unclean hands .
 If they would serve their fellow-men , let them do it by making manifest the power and reality of conscience , in constraining them to penitential self-abasement .
 Wouldst thou have me to believe , O wise and pious friend , that a false show can be better—can be more for God’s glory , or man’s welfare—than God’s own truth .
 Trust me , such men deceive themselves .
 
.
 It may be so ,  said the young clergyman indifferently , as waiving a discussion that he considered irrelevant or unseasonable .
 He had a ready faculty , indeed , of escaping from any topic that agitated his too sensitive and nervous temperament .
 —But , now , I would ask of my well-skilled physician , whether , in good sooth , he deems me to have profited by his kindly care of this weak frame of mine .
 
.
 Roger Chillingworth had by this time approached the window , and smiled grimly down .
 
.
 There is no law , nor reverence for authority , no regard for human ordinances or opinions , right or wrong , mixed up with that child’s composition ,  remarked he , as much to himself as to his companion .
 I saw her , the other day , bespatter the Governor himself with water , at the cattle-trough in Spring Lane .
 What , in Heaven’s name , is she .
 Is the imp altogether evil .
 Hath she affections .
 Hath she any discoverable principle of being .
 
.
 None , —save the freedom of a broken law ,  answered MrDimmesdale , in a quiet way , as if he had been discussing the point within himself .
 Whether capable of good , I know not .
 
.
 So she drew her mother away , skipping , dancing , and frisking fantastically among the hillocks of the dead people , like a creature that had nothing in common with a bygone and buried generation , nor owned herself akin to it .
 It was as if she had been made afresh , out of new elements , and must perforce be permitted to live her own life , and be a law unto herself , without her eccentricities being reckoned to her for a crime .
 
.
 There goes a woman ,  resumed Roger Chillingworth , after a pause , who , be her demerits what they may , hath none of that mystery of hidden sinfulness which you deem so grievous to be borne .
 Is Hester Prynne the less miserable , think you , for that scarlet letter on her breast .
 
.
 You inquired of me , a little time agone ,  said he , at length , my judgment as touching your health .
 
.
 I did ,  answered the clergyman , and would gladly learn it .
 Speak frankly , I pray you , be it for life or death .
 
.
 Freely , then , and plainly ,  said the physician , still busy with his plants , but keeping a wary eye on MrDimmesdale , the disorder is a strange one .
 not so much in itself , nor as outwardly manifested—in so far , at least , as the symptoms have been laid open to my observation .
 Looking daily at you , my good Sir , and watching the tokens of your aspect , now for months gone by , I should deem you a man sore sick , it may be , yet not so sick but that an instructed and watchful physician might well hope to cure you .
 But—I know not what to say—the disease is what I seem to know , yet know it not .
 
.
 You speak in riddles , learned Sir ,  said the pale minister , glancing aside out of the window .
 
.
 Then , to speak more plainly ,  continued the physician , and I crave pardon , Sir , —should it seem to require pardon , —for this needful plainness of my speech .
 Let me ask , —as your friend , —as one having charge , under Providence , of your life and physical well-being , —hath all the operation of this disorder been fairly laid open and recounted to me .
 
.
 How can you question it .
  asked the minister .
 Surely , it were child’s play to call in a physician , and then hide the sore .
 
.
 Then I need ask no further ,  said the clergyman , somewhat hastily rising from his chair .
 You deal not , I take it , in medicine for the soul .
 
.
 Thus , a sickness ,  continued Roger Chillingworth , going on , in an unaltered tone , without heeding the interruption , —but standing up , and confronting the emaciated and white-cheeked minister with his low , dark , and misshapen figure , —a sickness , a sore place , if we may so call it , in your spirit , hath immediately its appropriate manifestation in your bodily frame .
 Would you , therefore , that your physician heal the bodily evil .
 How may this be , unless you first lay open to him the wound or trouble in your soul .
 
.
 With a frantic gesture , he rushed out of the room .
 
.
 It is as well , to have made this step ,  said Roger Chillingworth to himself , looking after the minister with a grave smile .
 There is nothing lost .
 We shall be friends again anon .
 But see , now , how passion takes hold upon this man , and hurrieth him out of himself .
 As with one passion , so with another .
 He hath done a wild thing ere now , this pious Master Dimmesdale , in the hot passion of his heart .
 
.
 It came to pass , not long after the scene above recorded , that the Reverend MrDimmesdale , at noon-day , and entirely unawares , fell into a deep , deep slumber , sitting in his chair , with a large black-letter volume open before him on the table .
 It must have been a work of vast ability in the somniferous school of literature .
 The profound depth of the minister’s repose was the more remarkable .
 inasmuch as he was one of those persons whose sleep , ordinarily , is as light , as fitful , and as easily scared away , as a small bird hopping on a twig .
 To such an unwonted remoteness , however , had his spirit now withdrawn into itself , that he stirred not in his chair , when old Roger Chillingworth , without any extraordinary precaution , came into the room .
 The physician advanced directly in front of his patient , laid his hand upon his bosom , and thrust aside the vestment , that , hitherto , had always covered it even from the professional eye .
 
.
 Then , indeed , MrDimmesdale shuddered , and slightly stirred .
 
.
 After a brief pause , the physician turned away .
 
.
 But what distinguished the physician’s ecstasy from Satan’s was the trait of wonder in it .
 
.
 After the incident last described , the intercourse between the clergyman and the physician , though externally the same , was really of another character than it had previously been .
 The intellect of Roger Chillingworth had now a sufficiently plain path before it .
 It was not , indeed , precisely that which he had laid out for himself to tread .
 Calm , gentle , passionless , as he appeared , there was yet , we fear , a quiet depth of malice , hitherto latent , but active now , in this unfortunate old man , which led him to imagine a more intimate revenge than any mortal had ever wreaked upon an enemy .
 To make himself the one trusted friend , to whom should be confided all the fear , the remorse , the agony , the ineffectual repentance , the backward rush of sinful thoughts , expelled in vain .
 All that guilty sorrow , hidden from the world , whose great heart would have pitied and forgiven , to be revealed to him , the Pitiless , to him , the Unforgiving .
 All that dark treasure to be lavished on the very man , to whom nothing else could so adequately pay the debt of vengeance .
 
.
 While thus suffering under bodily disease , and gnawed and tortured by some black trouble of the soul , and given over to the machinations of his deadliest enemy , the Reverend MrDimmesdale had achieved a brilliant popularity in his sacred office .
 He won it , indeed , in great part , by his sorrows .
 His intellectual gifts , his moral perceptions , his power of experiencing and communicating emotion , were kept in a state of preternatural activity by the prick and anguish of his daily life .
 His fame , though still on its upward slope , already overshadowed the soberer reputations of his fellow-clergymen , eminent as several of them were .
 There were scholars among them , who had spent more years in acquiring abstruse lore , connected with the divine profession , than MrDimmesdale had lived .
 and who might well , therefore , be more profoundly versed in such solid and valuable attainments than their youthful brother .
 There were men , too , of a sturdier texture of mind than his , and endowed with a far greater share of shrewd , hard , iron or granite understanding .
 which , duly mingled with a fair proportion of doctrinal ingredient , constitutes a highly respectable , efficacious , and unamiable variety of the clerical species .
 There were others , again , true saintly fathers , whose faculties had been elaborated by weary toil among their books , and by patient thought , and etherealized , moreover , by spiritual communications with the better world , into which their purity of life had almost introduced these holy personages , with their garments of mortality still clinging to them .
 All that they lacked was the gift that descended upon the chosen disciples , at Pentecost , in tongues of flame .
 symbolizing , it would seem , not the power of speech in foreign and unknown languages , but that of addressing the whole human brotherhood in the heart’s native language .
 These fathers , otherwise so apostolic , lacked Heaven’s last and rarest attestation of their office , the Tongue of Flame .
 They would have vainly sought—had they ever dreamed of seeking—to express the highest truths through the humblest medium of familiar words and images .
 Their voices came down , afar and indistinctly , from the upper heights where they habitually dwelt .
 
.
 And thus , while standing on the scaffold , in this vain show of expiation , MrDimmesdale was overcome with a great horror of mind , as if the universe were gazing at a scarlet token on his naked breast , right over his heart .
 On that spot , in very truth , there was , and there had long been , the gnawing and poisonous tooth of bodily pain .
 Without any effort of his will , or power to restrain himself , he shrieked aloud .
 an outcry that went pealing through the night , and was beaten back from one house to another , and reverberated from the hills in the background .
 as if a company of devils detecting so much misery and terror in it , had made a plaything of the sound , and were bandying it to and fro .
 
.
 It is done .
  muttered the minister , covering his face with his hands .
 The whole town will awake and hurry forth , and find me here .
 
.
 Detecting the gleam of Governor Bellingham’s lamp , the old lady quickly extinguished her own , and vanished .
 Possibly , she went up among the clouds .
 The minister saw nothing further of her motions .
 The magistrate , after a wary observation of the darkness—into which , nevertheless , he could see but little farther than he might into a mill-stone—retired from the window .
 
.
 As the Reverend MrWilson passed beside the scaffold , closely muffling his Geneva cloak about him with one arm , and holding the lantern before his breast with the other , the minister could hardly restrain himself from speaking .
 
.
 A good evening to you , venerable Father Wilson .
 Come up hither , I pray you , and pass a pleasant hour with me .
 
.
 Pearl .
 Little Pearl .
  cried he , after a moment’s pause .
 then , suppressing his voice , —Hester .
 Hester Prynne .
 Are you there .
 
.
 Whence come you , Hester .
  asked the minister .
 What sent you hither .
 
.
 Come up hither , Hester , thou and little Pearl ,  said the Reverend MrDimmesdale .
 Ye have both been here before , but I was not with you .
 Come up hither once again , and we will stand all three together .
 
.
 Minister .
  whispered little Pearl .
 
.
 What wouldst thou say , child .
  asked MrDimmesdale .
 
.
 Wilt thou stand here with mother and me , to-morrow noontide .
  inquired Pearl .
 
.
 Pearl laughed , and attempted to pull away her hand .
 But the minister held it fast .
 
.
 A moment longer , my child .
  said he .
 
.
 But wilt thou promise ,  asked Pearl , to take my hand , and mother’s hand , to-morrow noontide .
 
.
 Not then , Pearl ,  said the minister , but another time .
 
.
 And what other time .
  persisted the child .
 
.
 At the great judgment day .
  whispered the minister , —and , strangely enough , the sense that he was a professional teacher of the truth impelled him to answer the child so .
 Then , and there , before the judgment-seat , thy mother , and thou , and I , must stand together .
 But the daylight of this world shall not see our meeting .
 
.
 Pearl laughed again .
 
.
 There was witchcraft in little Pearl’s eyes .
 and her face , as she glanced upward at the minister , wore that naughty smile which made its expression frequently so elvish .
 She withdrew her hand from MrDimmesdale’s , and pointed across the street .
 But he clasped both his hands over his breast , and cast his eyes towards the zenith .
 
.
 Who is that man , Hester .
  gasped MrDimmesdale , overcome with terror .
 I shiver at him .
 Dost thou know the man .
 I hate him , Hester .
 
.
 She remembered her oath , and was silent .
 
.
 Minister ,  said little Pearl , I can tell thee who he is .
 
.
 Quickly , then , child .
  said the minister , bending his ear close to her lips .
 Quickly .
 —and as low as thou canst whisper .
 
.
 Dost thou mock me now .
  said the minister .
 
.
 Thou wast not bold .
 —thou wast not true .
  answered the child .
 Thou wouldst not promise to take my hand , and mother’s hand , to-morrow noontide .
 
.
 How knewest thou that I was here .
  asked the minister , fearfully .
 
.
 I will go home with you ,  said MrDimmesdale .
 
.
 With a chill despondency , like one awaking , all nerveless , from an ugly dream , he yielded himself to the physician , and was led away .
 
.
 It was found ,  said the sexton , this morning , on the scaffold , where evil-doers are set up to public shame .
 Satan dropped it there , I take it , intending a scurrilous jest against your reverence .
 But , indeed , he was blind and foolish , as he ever and always is .
 A pure hand needs no glove to cover it .
 
.
 Thank you , my good friend ,  said the minister gravely , but startled at heart .
 for , so confused was his remembrance , that he had almost brought himself to look at the events of the past night as visionary .
 Yes , it seems to be my glove indeed .
 
.
 And , since Satan saw fit to steal it , your reverence must needs handle him without gloves , henceforward ,  remarked the old sexton , grimly smiling .
 But did your reverence hear of the portent that was seen last night .
 A great red letter in the sky , —the letter A , —which we interpret to stand for Angel .
 For , as our good Governor Winthrop was made an angel this past night , it was doubtless held fit that there should be some notice thereof .
 
.
 It was only the darkened house that could contain her .
 When sunshine came again , she was not there .
 Her shadow had faded across the threshold .
 The helpful inmate had departed , without one backward glance to gather up the meed of gratitude , if any were in hearts of those whom she had served so zealously .
 Meeting them in the street , she never raised her head to receive their greeting .
 If they were resolute to accost her , she laid her finger on the scarlet letter , and passed on .
 This might be pride , but was so like humility , that it produced all the softening influence of the latter quality on the public mind .
 The public is despotic in its temper .
 it is capable of denying common justice , when too strenuously demanded as a right .
 but quite as frequently it awards more than justice , when the appeal is made , as despots love to have it made , entirely to its generosity .
 Interpreting Hester Prynne’s deportment as an appeal of this nature , society was inclined to show its former victim a more benign countenance than she cared to be favored with , or , perchance , than she deserved .
 
.
 The rulers , and the wise and learned men of the community , were longer in acknowledging the influence of Hester’s good qualities than the people .
 The prejudices which they shared in common with the latter were fortified in themselves by an iron framework of reasoning , that made it a far tougher labor to expel them .
 Day by day , nevertheless , their sour and rigid wrinkles were relaxing into something which , in the due course of years , might grow to be an expression of almost benevolence .
 Thus it was with the men of rank , on whom their eminent position imposed the guardianship of the public morals .
 Individuals in private life , meanwhile , had quite forgiven Hester Prynne for her frailty .
 nay , more , they had begun to look upon the scarlet letter as the token , not of that one sin , for which she had borne so long and dreary a penance , but of her many good deeds since .
 Do you see that woman with the embroidered badge .
  they would say to strangers .
 It is our Hester , —the town’s own Hester , —who is so kind to the poor , so helpful to the sick , so comfortable to the afflicted .
  Then , it is true , the propensity of human nature to tell the very worst of itself , when embodied in the person of another , would constrain them to whisper the black scandal of bygone years .
 It was none the less a fact , however , that , in the eyes of the very men who spoke thus , the scarlet letter had the effect of the cross on a nun’s bosom .
 It imparted to the wearer a kind of sacredness , which enabled her to walk securely amid all peril .
 Had she fallen among thieves , it would have kept her safe .
 It was reported , and believed by many , that an Indian had drawn his arrow against the badge , and that the missile struck it , but fell harmless to the ground .
 
.
 The scarlet letter had not done its office .
 
.
 Meanwhile , her mother had accosted the physician .
 
.
 I would speak a word with you ,  said she , —a word that concerns us much .
 
.
 Aha .
 And is it Mistress Hester that has a word for old Roger Chillingworth .
  answered he , raising himself from his stooping posture .
 With all my heart .
 Why , Mistress , I hear good tidings of you on all hands .
 No longer ago than yester-eve , a magistrate , a wise and godly man , was discoursing of your affairs , Mistress Hester , and whispered me that there had been question concerning you in the council .
 It was debated whether or no , with safety to the common weal , yonder scarlet letter might be taken off your bosom .
 On my life , Hester , I made my entreaty to the worshipful magistrate that it might be done forthwith .
 
.
 It lies not in the pleasure of the magistrates to take off this badge ,  calmly replied Hester .
 Were I worthy to be quit of it , it would fall away of its own nature , or be transformed into something that should speak a different purport .
 
.
 Nay , then , wear it , if it suit you better ,  rejoined he .
 A woman must needs follow her own fancy , touching the adornment of her person .
 The letter is gayly embroidered , and shows right bravely on your bosom .
 
.
 The scarlet letter burned on Hester Prynne’s bosom .
 Here was another ruin , the responsibility of which came partly home to her .
 
.
 What see you in my face ,  asked the physician , that you look at it so earnestly .
 
.
 Something that would make me weep , if there were any tears bitter enough for it ,  answered she .
 But let it pass .
 It is of yonder miserable man that I would speak .
 
.
 When we last spake together ,  said Hester , now seven years ago , it was your pleasure to extort a promise of secrecy , as touching the former relation betwixt yourself and me .
 As the life and good fame of yonder man were in your hands , there seemed no choice to me , save to be silent , in accordance with your behest .
 Yet it was not without heavy misgivings that I thus bound myself .
 for , having cast off all duty towards other human beings , there remained a duty towards him .
 and something whispered me that I was betraying it , in pledging myself to keep your counsel .
 Since that day , no man is so near to him as you .
 You tread behind his every footstep .
 You are beside him , sleeping and waking .
 You search his thoughts .
 You burrow and rankle in his heart .
 Your clutch is on his life , and you cause him to die daily a living death .
 and still he knows you not .
 In permitting this , I have surely acted a false part by the only man to whom the power was left me to be true .
 
.
 What choice had you .
  asked Roger Chillingworth .
 My finger , pointed at this man , would have hurled him from his pulpit into a dungeon , —thence , peradventure , to the gallows .
 
.
 It had been better so .
  said Hester Prynne .
 
.
 What evil have I done the man .
  asked Roger Chillingworth again .
 I tell thee , Hester Prynne , the richest fee that ever physician earned from monarch could not have bought such care as I have wasted on this miserable priest .
 But for my aid , his life would have burned away in torments , within the first two years after the perpetration of his crime and thine .
 For , Hester , his spirit lacked the strength that could have borne up , as thine has , beneath a burden like thy scarlet letter .
 O , I could reveal a goodly secret .
 But enough .
 What art can do , I have exhausted on him .
 That he now breathes , and creeps about on earth , is owing all to me .
 
.
 Better he had died at once .
  said Hester Prynne .
 
.
 The unfortunate physician , while uttering these words , lifted his hands with a look of horror , as if he had beheld some frightful shape , which he could not recognize , usurping the place of his own image in a glass .
 It was one of those moments—which sometimes occur only at the interval of years—when a man’s moral aspect is faithfully revealed to his mind’s eye .
 Not improbably , he had never before viewed himself as he did now .
 
.
 Hast thou not tortured him enough .
  said Hester , noticing the old man’s look .
 Has he not paid thee all .
 
.
 All this , and more ,  said Hester .
 
.
 And what am I now .
  demanded he , looking into her face , and permitting the whole evil within him to be written on his features .
 I have already told thee what I am .
 A fiend .
 Who made me so .
 
.
 It was myself .
  cried Hester , shuddering .
 It was I , not less than he .
 Why hast thou not avenged thyself on me .
 
.
 I have left thee to the scarlet letter ,  replied Roger Chillingworth .
 If that have not avenged me , I can do no more .
 
.
 He laid his finger on it , with a smile .
 
.
 It has avenged thee .
  answered Hester Prynne .
 
.
 I judged no less ,  said the physician .
 And now , what wouldst thou with me touching this man .
 
.
 Woman , I could wellnigh pity thee .
  said Roger Chillingworth , unable to restrain a thrill of admiration too .
 for there was a quality almost majestic in the despair which she expressed .
 Thou hadst great elements .
 Peradventure , hadst thou met earlier with a better love than mine , this evil had not been .
 I pity thee , for the good that has been wasted in thy nature .
 
.
 He waved his hand , and betook himself again to his employment of gathering herbs .
 
.
 Be it sin or no ,  said Hester Prynne bitterly , as she still gazed after him , I hate the man .
 
.
 Yes , I hate him .
  repeated Hester , more bitterly than before .
 He betrayed me .
 He has done me worse wrong than I did him .
 
.
 Let men tremble to win the hand of woman , unless they win along with it the utmost passion of her heart .
 Else it may be their miserable fortune , as it was Roger Chillingworth’s , when some mightier touch than their own may have awakened all her sensibilities , to be reproached even for the calm content , the marble image of happiness , which they will have imposed upon her as the warm reality .
 But Hester ought long ago to have done with this injustice .
 What did it betoken .
 Had seven long years , under the torture of the scarlet letter , inflicted so much of misery , and wrought out no repentance .
 
.
 The emotions of that brief space , while she stood gazing after the crooked figure of old Roger Chillingworth , threw a dark light on Hester’s state of mind , revealing much that she might not otherwise have acknowledged to herself .
 
.
 He being gone , she summoned back her child .
 
.
 Pearl .
 Little Pearl .
 Where are you .
 
.
 Pearl , whose activity of spirit never flagged , had been at no loss for amusement while her mother talked with the old gatherer of herbs .
 At first , as already told , she had flirted fancifully with her own image in a pool of water , beckoning the phantom forth , and—as it declined to venture—seeking a passage for herself into its sphere of impalpable earth and unattainable sky .
 Soon finding , however , that either she or the image was unreal , she turned elsewhere for better pastime .
 She made little boats out of birch-bark , and freighted them with snail-shells , and sent out more ventures on the mighty deep than any merchant in New England .
 but the larger part of them foundered near the shore .
 She seized a live horseshoe by the tail , and made prize of several five-fingers , and laid out a jelly-fish to melt in the warm sun .
 Then she took up the white foam , that streaked the line of the advancing tide , and threw it upon the breeze , scampering after it with winged footsteps , to catch the great snow-flakes ere they fell .
 Perceiving a flock of beach-birds , that fed and fluttered along the shore , the naughty child picked up her apron full of pebbles , and , creeping from rock to rock after these small sea-fowl , displayed remarkable dexterity in pelting them .
 One little gray bird , with a white breast , Pearl was almost sure , had been hit by a pebble and fluttered away with a broken wing .
 But then the elf-child sighed , and gave up her sport .
 because it grieved her to have done harm to a little being that was as wild as the sea-breeze , or as wild as Pearl herself .
 
.
 Her final employment was to gather sea-weed , of various kinds , and make herself a scarf , or mantle , and a head-dress , and thus assume the aspect of a little mermaid .
 She inherited her mother’s gift for devising drapery and costume .
 As the last touch to her mermaid’s garb , Pearl took some eel-grass , and imitated , as best she could , on her own bosom , the decoration with which she was so familiar on her mother’s .
 A letter , —the letter A , —but freshly green , instead of scarlet .
 The child bent her chin upon her breast , and contemplated this device with strange interest .
 even as if the one only thing for which she had been sent into the world was to make out its hidden import .
 
.
 I wonder if mother will ask me what it means .
  thought Pearl .
 
.
 My little Pearl ,  said Hester , after a moment’s silence , the green letter , and on thy childish bosom , has no purport .
 But dost thou know , my child , what this letter means which thy mother is doomed to wear .
 
.
 Yes , mother ,  said the child .
 It is the great letter A .
 Thou hast taught it me in the horn-book .
 
.
 Hester looked steadily into her little face .
 but , though there was that singular expression which she had so often remarked in her black eyes , she could not satisfy herself whether Pearl really attached any meaning to the symbol .
 She felt a morbid desire to ascertain the point .
 
.
 Dost thou know , child , wherefore thy mother wears this letter .
 
.
 Truly do I .
  answered Pearl , looking brightly into her mother’s face .
 It is for the same reason that the minister keeps his hand over his heart .
 
.
 Nay , mother , I have told all I know ,  said Pearl , more seriously than she was wont to speak .
 Ask yonder old man whom thou hast been talking with .
 It may be he can tell .
 But in good earnest now , mother dear , what does this scarlet letter mean .
 —and why dost thou wear it on thy bosom .
 —and why does the minister keep his hand over his heart .
 
.
 Pearl’s inevitable tendency to hover about the enigma of the scarlet letter seemed an innate quality of her being .
 From the earliest epoch of her conscious life , she had entered upon this as her appointed mission .
 Hester had often fancied that Providence had a design of justice and retribution , in endowing the child with this marked propensity .
 but never , until now , had she bethought herself to ask , whether , linked with that design , there might not likewise be a purpose of mercy and beneficence .
 If little Pearl were entertained with faith and trust , as a spirit-messenger no less than an earthly child , might it not be her errand to soothe away the sorrow that lay cold in her mother’s heart , and converted it into a tomb .
 —and to help her to overcome the passion , once so wild , and even yet neither dead nor asleep , but only imprisoned within the same tomb-like heart .
 
.
 What does the letter mean , mother .
 —and why dost thou wear it .
 —and why does the minister keep his hand over his heart .
 
.
 What shall I say .
  thought Hester to herself .
 —No .
 If this be the price of the child’s sympathy , I cannot pay it .
 
.
 Then she spoke aloud .
 
.
 Silly Pearl ,  said she , what questions are these .
 There are many things in this world that a child must not ask about .
 What know I of the minister’s heart .
 And as for the scarlet letter , I wear it for the sake of its gold thread .
 
.
 In all the seven bygone years , Hester Prynne had never before been false to the symbol on her bosom .
 It may be that it was the talisman of a stern and severe , but yet a guardian spirit , who now forsook her .
 as recognizing that , in spite of his strict watch over her heart , some new evil had crept into it , or some old one had never been expelled .
 As for little Pearl , the earnestness soon passed out of her face .
 
.
 Mother ,  said she , what does the scarlet letter mean .
 
.
 And the next morning , the first indication the child gave of being awake was by popping up her head from the pillow , and making that other inquiry , which she had so unaccountably connected with her investigations about the scarlet letter : —
.
 Mother .
 —Mother .
 —Why does the minister keep his hand over his heart .
 
.
 Nor ever will , my child , I hope ,  said Hester .
 
.
 And why not , mother .
  asked Pearl , stopping short , just at the beginning of her race .
 Will not it come of its own accord , when I am a woman grown .
 
.
 Run away , child ,  answered her mother , and catch the sunshine .
 It will soon be gone .
 
.
 I am not aweary , mother ,  replied the little girl .
 But you may sit down , if you will tell me a story meanwhile .
 
.
 A story , child .
  said Hester .
 And about what .
 
.
 And who told you this story , Pearl .
  asked her mother , recognizing a common superstition of the period .
 
.
 It was the old dame in the chimney-corner , at the house where you watched last night ,  said the child .
 But she fancied me asleep while she was talking of it .
 She said that a thousand and a thousand people had met him here , and had written in his book , and have his mark on them .
 And that ugly-tempered lady , old Mistress Hibbins , was one .
 And , mother , the old dame said that this scarlet letter was the Black Man’s mark on thee , and that it glows like a red flame when thou meetest him at midnight , here in the dark wood .
 Is it true , mother .
 And dost thou go to meet him in the night-time .
 
.
 Didst thou ever awake , and find thy mother gone .
  asked Hester .
 
.
 Not that I remember ,  said the child .
 If thou fearest to leave me in our cottage , thou mightest take me along with thee .
 I would very gladly go .
 But , mother , tell me now .
 Is there such a Black Man .
 And didst thou ever meet him .
 And is this his mark .
 
.
 Wilt thou let me be at peace , if I once tell thee .
  asked her mother .
 
.
 Yes , if thou tellest me all ,  answered Pearl .
 
.
 Once in my life I met the Black Man .
  said her mother .
 This scarlet letter is his mark .
 
.
 O brook .
 O foolish and tiresome little brook .
  cried Pearl , after listening awhile to its talk .
 Why art thou so sad .
 Pluck up a spirit , and do not be all the time sighing and murmuring .
 
.
 What does this sad little brook say , mother .
  inquired she .
 
.
 If thou hadst a sorrow of thine own , the brook might tell thee of it ,  answered her mother , even as it is telling me of mine .
 But now , Pearl , I hear a footstep along the path , and the noise of one putting aside the branches .
 I would have thee betake thyself to play , and leave me to speak with him that comes yonder .
 
.
 Is it the Black Man .
  asked Pearl .
 
.
 Wilt thou go and play , child .
  repeated her mother .
 But do not stray far into the wood .
 And take heed that thou come at my first call .
 
.
 Yes , mother ,  answered Pearl .
 But , if it be the Black Man , wilt thou not let me stay a moment , and look at him , with his big book under his arm .
 
.
 And so it is .
  said the child .
 And , mother , he has his hand over his heart .
 Is it because , when the minister wrote his name in the book , the Black Man set his mark in that place .
 But why does he not wear it outside his bosom , as thou dost , mother .
 
.
 Go now , child , and thou shalt tease me as thou wilt another time cried Hester Prynne .
 But do not stray far .
 Keep where thou canst hear the babble of the brook .
 
.
 To Hester’s eye , the Reverend MrDimmesdale exhibited no symptom of positive and vivacious suffering , except that , as little Pearl had remarked , he kept his hand over his heart .
 
.
 Slowly as the minister walked , he had almost gone by , before Hester Prynne could gather voice enough to attract his observation .
 At length , she succeeded .
 
.
 Who speaks .
  answered the minister .
 
.
 He made a step nigher , and discovered the scarlet letter .
 
.
 Hester .
 Hester Prynne .
  said he .
 Is it thou .
 Art thou in life .
 
.
 After a while , the minister fixed his eyes on Hester Prynne’s .
 
.
 Hester ,  said he , hast thou found peace .
 
.
 She smiled drearily , looking down upon her bosom .
 
.
 Hast thou .
  she asked .
 
.
 The people reverence thee ,  said Hester .
 And surely thou workest good among them .
 Doth this bring thee no comfort .
 
.
 You wrong yourself in this ,  said Hester , gently .
 You have deeply and sorely repented .
 Your sin is left behind you , in the days long past .
 Your present life is not less holy , in very truth , than it seems in people’s eyes .
 Is there no reality in the penitence thus sealed and witnessed by good works .
 And wherefore should it not bring you peace .
 
.
 Such a friend as thou hast even now wished for ,  said she , with whom to weep over thy sin , thou hast in me , the partner of it .
 —Again she hesitated , but brought out the words with an effort .
 —Thou hast long had such an enemy , and dwellest with him under the same roof .
 
.
 The minister started to his feet , gasping for breath , and clutching at his heart as if he would have torn it out of his bosom .
 
.
 Hester Prynne was now fully sensible of the deep injury for which she was responsible to this unhappy man , in permitting him to lie for so many years , or , indeed , for a single moment , at the mercy of one , whose purposes could not be other than malevolent .
 The very contiguity of his enemy , beneath whatever mask the latter might conceal himself , was enough to disturb the magnetic sphere of a being so sensitive as Arthur Dimmesdale .
 There had been a period when Hester was less alive to this consideration .
 or , perhaps , in the misanthropy of her own trouble , she left the minister to bear what she might picture to herself as a more tolerable doom .
 But of late , since the night of his vigil , all her sympathies towards him had been both softened and invigorated .
 She now read his heart more accurately .
 She doubted not , that the continual presence of Roger Chillingworth , —the secret poison of his malignity , infecting all the air about him , —and his authorized interference , as a physician , with the minister’s physical and spiritual infirmities , —that these bad opportunities had been turned to a cruel purpose .
 By means of them , the sufferer’s conscience had been kept in an irritated state , the tendency of which was , not to cure by wholesome pain , but to disorganize and corrupt his spiritual being .
 Its result , on earth , could hardly fail to be insanity , and hereafter , that eternal alienation from the Good and True , of which madness is perhaps the earthly type .
 
.
 Such was the ruin to which she had brought the man , once , —nay , why should we not speak it .
 —still so passionately loved .
 Hester felt that the sacrifice of the clergyman’s good name , and death itself , as she had already told Roger Chillingworth , would have been infinitely preferable to the alternative which she had taken upon herself to choose .
 And now , rather than have had this grievous wrong to confess , she would gladly have lain down on the forest-leaves , and died there , at Arthur Dimmesdale’s feet .
 
.
 Thou shalt forgive me .
  cried Hester , flinging herself on the fallen leaves beside him .
 Let God punish .
 Thou shalt forgive .
 
.
 With sudden and desperate tenderness , she threw her arms around him , and pressed his head against her bosom .
 little caring though his cheek rested on the scarlet letter .
 He would have released himself , but strove in vain to do so .
 Hester would not set him free , lest he should look her sternly in the face .
 All the world had frowned on her , —for seven long years had it frowned upon this lonely woman , —and still she bore it all , nor ever once turned away her firm , sad eyes .
 Heaven , likewise , had frowned upon her , and she had not died .
 But the frown of this pale , weak , sinful , and sorrow-stricken man was what Hester could not bear , and live .
 
.
 Wilt thou yet forgive me .
  she repeated , over and over again .
 Wilt thou not frown .
 Wilt thou forgive .
 
.
 Never , never .
  whispered she .
 What we did had a consecration of its own .
 We felt it so .
 We said so to each other .
 Hast thou forgotten it .
 
.
 And yet they lingered .
 How dreary looked the forest-track that led backward to the settlement , where Hester Prynne must take up again the burden of her ignominy , and the minister the hollow mockery of his good name .
 So they lingered an instant longer .
 No golden light had ever been so precious as the gloom of this dark forest .
 Here , seen only by his eyes , the scarlet letter need not burn into the bosom of the fallen woman .
 Here , seen only by her eyes , Arthur Dimmesdale , false to God and man , might be , for one moment , true .
 
.
 He started at a thought that suddenly occurred to him .
 
.
 Thou must dwell no longer with this man ,  said Hester , slowly and firmly .
 Thy heart must be no longer under his evil eye .
 
.
 It were far worse than death .
  replied the minister .
 But how to avoid it .
 What choice remains to me .
 Shall I lie down again on these withered leaves , where I cast myself when thou didst tell me what he was .
 Must I sink down there , and die at once .
 
.
 Alas , what a ruin has befallen thee .
  said Hester , with the tears gushing into her eyes .
 Wilt thou die for very weakness .
 There is no other cause .
 
.
 The judgment of God is on me ,  answered the conscience-stricken priest .
 It is too mighty for me to struggle with .
 
.
 Heaven would show mercy ,  rejoined Hester hadst thou but the strength to take advantage of it .
 
.
 Be thou strong for me .
  answered he .
 Advise me what to do .
 
.
 Is the world then so narrow .
  exclaimed Hester Prynne , fixing her deep eyes on the minister’s , and instinctively exercising a magnetic power over a spirit so shattered and subdued , that it could hardly hold itself erect .
 Doth the universe lie within the compass of yonder town , which only a little time ago was but a leaf-strewn desert , as lonely as this around us .
 Whither leads yonder forest-track .
 Backward to the settlement , thou sayest .
 Yes .
 but onward , too .
 Deeper it goes , and deeper , into the wilderness , less plainly to be seen at every step .
 until , some few miles hence , the yellow leaves will show no vestige of the white man’s tread .
 There thou art free .
 So brief a journey would bring thee from a world where thou hast been most wretched , to one where thou mayest still be happy .
 Is there not shade enough in all this boundless forest to hide thy heart from the gaze of Roger Chillingworth .
 
.
 It cannot be .
  answered the minister , listening as if he were called upon to realize a dream .
 I am powerless to go .
 Wretched and sinful as I am , I have had no other thought than to drag on my earthly existence in the sphere where Providence hath placed me .
 Lost as my own soul is , I would still do what I may for other human souls .
 I dare not quit my post , though an unfaithful sentinel , whose sure reward is death and dishonor , when his dreary watch shall come to an end .
 
.
 It was the last expression of the despondency of a broken spirit .
 He lacked energy to grasp the better fortune that seemed within his reach .
 
.
 Alone , Hester .
 
.
 Thou shalt not go alone .
  answered she , in a deep whisper .
 
.
 Then , all was spoken .
 
.
 Arthur Dimmesdale gazed into Hester’s face with a look in which hope and joy shone out , indeed , but with fear betwixt them , and a kind of horror at her boldness , who had spoken what he vaguely hinted at , but dared not speak .
 
.
 But Hester Prynne , with a mind of native courage and activity , and for so long a period not merely estranged , but outlawed , from society , had habituated herself to such latitude of speculation as was altogether foreign to the clergyman .
 She had wandered , without rule or guidance , in a moral wilderness .
 as vast , as intricate and shadowy , as the untamed forest , amid the gloom of which they were now holding a colloquy that was to decide their fate .
 Her intellect and heart had their home , as it were , in desert places , where she roamed as freely as the wild Indian in his woods .
 For years past she had looked from this estranged point of view at human institutions , and whatever priests or legislators had established .
 criticizing all with hardly more reverence than the Indian would feel for the clerical band , the judicial robe , the pillory , the gallows , the fireside , or the church .
 The tendency of her fate and fortunes had been to set her free .
 The scarlet letter was her passport into regions where other women dared not tread .
 Shame , Despair , Solitude .
 These had been her teachers , —stern and wild ones , —and they had made her strong , but taught her much amiss .
 
.
 The minister , on the other hand , had never gone through an experience calculated to lead him beyond the scope of generally received laws .
 although , in a single instance , he had so fearfully transgressed one of the most sacred of them .
 But this had been a sin of passion , not of principle , nor even purpose .
 Since that wretched epoch , he had watched , with morbid zeal and minuteness , not his acts , —for those it was easy to arrange , —but each breath of emotion , and his every thought .
 At the head of the social system , as the clergymen of that day stood , he was only the more trammelled by its regulations , its principles , and even its prejudices .
 As a priest , the framework of his order inevitably hemmed him in .
 As a man who had once sinned , but who kept his conscience all alive and painfully sensitive by the fretting of an unhealed wound , he might have been supposed safer within the line of virtue , than if he had never sinned at all .
 
.
 The struggle , if there were one , need not be described .
 Let it suffice , that the clergyman resolved to flee , and not alone .
 
.
 Thou wilt go .
  said Hester calmly , as he met her glance .
 
.
 Do I feel joy again .
  cried he , wondering at himself .
 Methought the germ of it was dead in me .
 O Hester , thou art my better angel .
 I seem to have flung myself—sick , sin-stained , and sorrow-blackened—down upon these forest-leaves , and to have risen up all made anew , and with new powers to glorify Him that hath been merciful .
 This is already the better life .
 Why did we not find it sooner .
 
.
 Let us not look back ,  answered Hester Prynne .
 The past is gone .
 Wherefore should we linger upon it now .
 See .
 With this symbol , I undo it all , and make it as it had never been .
 
.
 Dost thou think the child will be glad to know me .
  asked the minister , somewhat uneasily .
 I have long shrunk from children , because they often show a distrust , —a backwardness to be familiar with me .
 I have even been afraid of little Pearl .
 
.
 I see the child ,  observed the minister .
 Yonder she is , standing in a streak of sunshine , a good way off , on the other side of the brook .
 So thou thinkest the child will love me .
 
.
 Thou wilt love her dearly ,  repeated Hester Prynne , as she and the minister sat watching little Pearl .
 Dost thou not think her beautiful .
 And see with what natural skill she has made those simple flowers adorn her .
 Had she gathered pearls , and diamonds , and rubies , in the wood , they could not have become her better .
 She is a splendid child .
 But I know whose brow she has .
 
.
 Dost thou know , Hester ,  said Arthur Dimmesdale , with an unquiet smile , that this dear child , tripping about always at thy side , hath caused me many an alarm .
 Methought—O Hester , what a thought is that , and how terrible to dread it .
 —that my own features were partly repeated in her face , and so strikingIy that the world might see them .
 But she is mostly thine .
 
.
 No , no .
 Not mostly .
  answered the mother with a tender smile .
 A little longer , and thou needest not to be afraid to trace whose child she is .
 But how strangely beautiful she looks , with those wild flowers in her hair .
 It is as if one of the fairies , whom we left in our dear old England , had decked her out to meet us .
 
.
 Let her see nothing strange , —no passion nor eagerness—in thy way of accosting her ,  whispered Hester .
 Our Pearl is a fitful and fantastic little elf , sometimes .
 Especially , she is seldom tolerant of emotion , when she does not fully comprehend the why and wherefore .
 But the child hath strong affections .
 She loves me , and will love thee .
 
.
 Thou canst not think ,  said the minister , glancing aside at Hester Prynne , how my heart dreads this interview , and yearns for it .
 But , in truth , as I already told thee , children are not readily won to be familiar with me .
 They will not climb my knee , nor prattle in my ear , nor answer to my smile .
 but stand apart , and eye me strangely .
 Even little babes , when I take them in my arms , weep bitterly .
 Yet Pearl , twice in her little lifetime , hath been kind to me .
 The first time , —thou knowest it well .
 The last was when thou ledst her with thee to the house of yonder stern old Governor .
 
.
 I have a strange fancy ,  observed the sensitive minister , that this brook is the boundary between two worlds , and that thou canst never meet thy Pearl again .
 Or is she an elfish spirit , who , as the legends of our childhood taught us , is forbidden to cross a running stream .
 Pray hasten her .
 for this delay has already imparted a tremor to my nerves .
 
.
 Come , dearest child .
  said Hester encouragingly , and stretching out both her arms .
 How slow thou art .
 When hast thou been so sluggish before now .
 Here is a friend of mine , who must be thy friend also .
 Thou wilt have twice as much love , henceforward , as thy mother alone could give thee .
 Leap across the brook and come to us .
 Thou canst leap like a young deer .
 
.
 Pearl still pointed with her forefinger .
 and a frown gathered on her brow .
 the more impressive from the childish , the almost baby-like aspect of the features that conveyed it .
 As her mother still kept beckoning to her , and arraying her face in a holiday suit of unaccustomed smiles , the child stamped her foot with a yet more imperious look and gesture .
 In the brook , again , was the fantastic beauty of the image , with its reflected frown , its pointed finger , and imperious gesture , giving emphasis to the aspect of little Pearl .
 
.
 Hasten , Pearl .
 or I shall be angry with thee .
  cried Hester Prynne , who , however inured to such behaviour on the elf-child’s part at other seasons , was naturally anxious for a more seemly deportment now .
 Leap across the brook , naughty child , and run hither .
 Else I must come to thee .
 
.
 The child turned her eyes to the point indicated .
 and there lay the scarlet letter , so close upon the margin of the stream , that the gold embroidery was reflected in it .
 
.
 Bring it hither .
  said Hester .
 
.
 Come thou and take it up .
  answered Pearl .
 
.
 Was ever such a child .
  observed Hester aside to the minister .
 O , I have much to tell thee about her .
 But , in very truth , she is right as regards this hateful token .
 I must bear its torture yet a little longer , —only a few days longer , —until we shall have left this region , and look back hither as to a land which we have dreamed of .
 The forest cannot hide it .
 The mid-ocean shall take it from my hand , and swallow it up for ever .
 
.
 When the dreary change was wrought , she extended her hand to Pearl .
 
.
 In a mood of tenderness that was not usual with her , she drew down her mother’s head , and kissed her brow and both her cheeks .
 But then—by a kind of necessity that always impelled this child to alloy whatever comfort she might chance to give with a throb of anguish—PearI put up her mouth , and kissed the scarlet letter too .
 
.
 That was not kind .
  said Hester .
 When thou hast shown me a little love , thou mockest me .
 
.
 Why doth the minister sit yonder .
  asked Pearl .
 
.
 Doth he love us .
  said Pearl , looking up with acute intelligence into her mother’s face .
 Will he go back with us , hand in hand , we three together , into the town .
 
.
 And will he always keep his hand over his heart .
  inquired Pearl .
 
.
 Foolish child , what a question is that .
  exclaimed her mother .
 Come and ask his blessing .
 
.
 So , reverend Sir , you have made a visit into the forest ,  observed the witch-lady , nodding her high head-dress at him .
 The next time , I pray you to allow me only a fair warning , and I shall be proud to bear you company .
 Without taking overmuch upon myself , my good word will go far towards gaining any strange gentleman a fair reception from yonder potentate you wot of .
 
.
 She passed on with her aged stateliness , but often turning back her head and smiling at him , like one willing to recognize a secret intimacy of connection .
 
.
 Have I then sold myself ,  thought the minister , to the fiend whom , if men say true , this yellow-starched and velveted old hag has chosen for her prince and master .
 
.
 The wretched minister .
 He had made a bargain very like it .
 Tempted by a dream of happiness , he had yielded himself with deliberate choice , as he had never done before , to what he knew was deadly sin .
 And the infectious poison of that sin had been thus rapidly diffused throughout his moral system .
 It had stupefied all blessed impulses , and awakened into vivid life the whole brotherhood of bad ones .
 Scorn , bitterness , unprovoked malignity , gratuitous desire of ill , ridicule of whatever was good and holy , all awoke , to tempt , even while they frightened him .
 And his encounter with old Mistress Hibbins , if it were a real incident , did but show his sympathy and fellowship with wicked mortals and the world of perverted spirits .
 
.
 There , on the table , with the inky pen beside it , was an unfinished sermon , with a sentence broken in the midst , where his thoughts had ceased to gush out upon the page two days before .
 He knew that it was himself , the thin and white-cheeked minister , who had done and suffered these things , and written thus far into the Election Sermon .
 But he seemed to stand apart , and eye this former self with scornful , pitying , but half-envious curiosity .
 That self was gone .
 Another man had returned out of the forest .
 a wiser one .
 with a knowledge of hidden mysteries which the simplicity of the former never could have reached .
 A bitter kind of knowledge that .
 
.
 Nay , I think not so ,  rejoined the Reverend MrDimmesdale .
 My journey , and the sight of the holy Apostle yonder , and the free air which I have breathed , have done me good , after so long confinement in my study .
 I think to need no more of your drugs , my kind physician , good though they be , and administered by a friendly hand .
 
.
 All this time , Roger Chillingworth was looking at the minister with the grave and intent regard of a physician towards his patient .
 But , in spite of this outward show , the latter was almost convinced of the old man’s knowledge , or , at least , his confident suspicion , with respect to his own interview with Hester Prynne .
 The physician knew , then , that , in the minister’s regard , he was no longer a trusted friend , but his bitterest enemy .
 So much being known , it would appear natural that a part of it should be expressed .
 It is singular , however , how long a time often passes before words embody things .
 and with what security two persons , who choose to avoid a certain subject , may approach its very verge , and retire without disturbing it .
 Thus , the minister felt no apprehension that Roger Chillingworth would touch , in express words , upon the real position which they sustained towards one another .
 Yet did the physician , in his dark way , creep frightfully near the secret .
 
.
 Yea , to another world ,  replied the minister , with pious resignation .
 Heaven grant it be a better one .
 for , in good sooth , I hardly think to tarry with my flock through the flitting seasons of another year .
 But , touching your medicine , kind Sir , in my present frame of body I need it not .
 
.
 I joy to hear it ,  answered the physician .
 It may be that my remedies , so long administered in vain , begin now to take due effect .
 Happy man were I , and well deserving of New England’s gratitude , could I achieve this cure .
 
.
 I thank you from my heart , most watchful friend ,  said the Reverend MrDimmesdale , with a solemn smile .
 I thank you , and can but requite your good deeds with my prayers .
 
.
 A good man’s prayers are golden recompense .
  rejoined old Roger Chillingworth , as he took his leave .
 Yea , they are the current gold coin of the New Jerusalem , with the King’s own mint-mark on them .
 
.
 Betimes in the morning of the day on which the new Governor was to receive his office at the hands of the people , Hester Prynne and little Pearl came into the market-place .
 It was already thronged with the craftsmen and other plebeian inhabitants of the town , in considerable numbers .
 among whom , likewise , were many rough figures , whose attire of deer-skins marked them as belonging to some of the forest settlements , which surrounded the little metropolis of the colony .
 
.
 It might be , on this one day , that there was an expression unseen before , nor , indeed , vivid enough to be detected now .
 unless some preternaturally gifted observer should have first read the heart , and have afterwards sought a corresponding development in the countenance and mien .
 Such a spiritual seer might have conceived , that , after sustaining the gaze of the multitude through seven miserable years as a necessity , a penance , and something which it was a stern religion to endure , she now , for one last time more , encountered it freely and voluntarily , in order to convert what had so long been agony into a kind of triumph .
 Look your last on the scarlet letter and its wearer .
 —the people’s victim and life-long bond-slave , as they fancied her , might say to them .
 Yet a little while , and she will be beyond your reach .
 A few hours longer , and the deep , mysterious ocean will quench and hide for ever the symbol which ye have caused to burn upon her bosom .
  Nor were it an inconsistency too improbable to be assigned to human nature , should we suppose a feeling of regret in Hester’s mind , at the moment when she was about to win her freedom from the pain which had been thus deeply incorporated with her being .
 Might there not be an irresistible desire to quaff a last , long , breathless draught of the cup of wormwood and aloes , with which nearly all her years of womanhood had been perpetually flavored .
 The wine of life , henceforth to be presented to her lips , must be indeed rich , delicious , and exhilarating , in its chased and golden beaker .
 or else leave an inevitable and weary languor , after the lees of bitterness wherewith she had been drugged , as with a cordial of intensest potency .
 
.
 He remembers thee a little babe , my child ,  answered Hester .
 
.
 They wait to see the procession pass ,  said Hester .
 For the Governor and the magistrates are to go by , and the ministers , and all the great people and good people , with the music , and the soldiers marching before them .
 
.
 And will the minister be there .
  asked Pearl .
 And will he hold out both his hands to me , as when thou ledst me to him from the brook-side .
 
.
 It was as Hester said , in regard to the unwonted jollity that brightened the faces of the people .
 Into this festal season of the year—as it already was , and continued to be during the greater part of two centuries—the Puritans compressed whatever mirth and public joy they deemed allowable to human infirmity .
 thereby so far dispelling the customary cloud , that , for the space of a single holiday , they appeared scarcely more grave than most other communities at a period of general affliction .
 
.
 But we perhaps exaggerate the gray or sable tinge , which undoubtedly characterized the mood and manners of the age .
 The persons now in the market-place of Boston had not been born to an inheritance of Puritanic gloom .
 They were native Englishmen , whose fathers had lived in the sunny richness of the Elizabethan epoch .
 a time when the life of England , viewed as one great mass , would appear to have been as stately , magnificent , and joyous , as the world has ever witnessed .
 Had they followed their hereditary taste , the New England settlers would have illustrated all events of public importance by bonfires , banquets , pageantries , and processions .
 Nor would it have been impracticable , in the observance of majestic ceremonies , to combine mirthful recreation with solemnity , and give , as it were , a grotesque and brilliant embroidery to the great robe of state , which a nation , at such festivals , puts on .
 There was some shadow of an attempt of this kind in the mode of celebrating the day on which the political year of the colony commenced .
 The dim reflection of a remembered splendor , a colorless and manifold diluted repetition of what they had beheld in proud old London , —we will not say at a royal coronation , but at a Lord Mayor’s show , —might be traced in the customs which our forefathers instituted , with reference to the annual installation of magistrates .
 The fathers and founders of the commonwealth—the statesman , the priest , and the soldier—deemed it a duty then to assume the outward state and majesty , which , in accordance with antique style , was looked upon as the proper garb of public or social eminence .
 All came forth , to move in procession before the people’s eye , and thus impart a needed dignity to the single framework of a government so newly constructed .
 
.
 What mean you .
  inquired Hester , startled more than she permitted to appear .
 Have you another passenger .
 
.
 Why , know you not ,  cried the shipmaster , that this physician here—Chillingworth , he calls himself—is minded to try my cabin-fare with you .
 Ay , ay , you must have known it .
 for he tells me he is of your party , and a close friend to the gentleman you spoke of , —he that is in peril from these sour old Puritan rulers .
 
.
 They know each other well , indeed ,  replied Hester , with a mien of calmness , though in the utmost consternation .
 They have long dwelt together .
 
.
 Nothing further passed between the mariner and Hester Prynne .
 But , at that instant , she beheld old Roger Chillingworth himself , standing in the remotest corner of the market-place , and smiling on her .
 a smile which—across the wide and bustling square , and through all the talk and laughter , and various thoughts , moods , and interests of the crowd—conveyed secret and fearful meaning .
 
.
 Before Hester Prynne could call together her thoughts , and consider what was practicable to be done in this new and startling aspect of affairs , the sound of military music was heard approaching along a contiguous street .
 It denoted the advance of the procession of magistrates and citizens , on its way towards the meeting-house .
 where , in compliance with a custom thus early established , and ever since observed , the Reverend MrDimmesdale was to deliver an Election Sermon .
 
.
 Next in order to the magistrates came the young and eminently distinguished divine , from whose lips the religious discourse of the anniversary was expected .
 His was the profession , at that era , in which intellectual ability displayed itself far more than in political life .
 for—leaving a higher motive out of the question—it offered inducements powerful enough , in the almost worshipping respect of the community , to win the most aspiring ambition into its service .
 Even political power—as in the case of Increase Mather—was within the grasp of a successful priest .
 
.
 Mother ,  said she , was that the same minister that kissed me by the brook .
 
.
 What should he say , Pearl ,  answered Hester , save that it was no time to kiss , and that kisses are not to be given in the market-place .
 Well for thee , foolish child , that thou didst not speak to him .
 
.
 Madam , I know not of what you speak ,  answered Hester Prynne , feeling Mistress Hibbins to be of infirm mind .
 yet strangely startled and awe-stricken by the confidence with which she affirmed a personal connection between so many persons herself among them and the Evil One .
 It is not for me to talk lightly of a learned and pious minister of the Word , like the Reverend MrDimmesdale .
 
.
 What is it , good Mistress Hibbins .
  eagerly asked little Pearl .
 Hast thou seen it .
 
.
 No matter , darling .
  responded Mistress Hibbins , making Pearl a profound reverence .
 Thou thyself wilt see it , one time or another .
 They say , child , thou art of the lineage of the Prince of the Air .
 Wilt thou ride with me , some fine night , to see thy father .
 Then thou shalt know wherefore the minister keeps his hand over his heart .
 
.
 Laughing so shrilly that all the market-place could hear her , the weird old gentlewoman took her departure .
 
.
 During all this time Hester stood , statue-like , at the foot of the scaffold .
 If the minister’s voice had not kept her there , there would nevertheless have been an inevitable magnetism in that spot , whence she dated the first hour of her life of ignominy .
 There was a sense within her , —too ill-defined to be made a thought , but weighing heavily on her mind , —that her whole orb of life , both before and after , was connected with this spot , as with the one point that gave it unity .
 
.
 Little Pearl , meanwhile , had quitted her mother’s side , and was playing at her own will about the market-place .
 She made the sombre crowd cheerful by her erratic and glistening ray .
 even as a bird of bright plumage illuminates a whole tree of dusky foliage by darting to and fro , half-seen and half-concealed , amid the twilight of the clustering leaves .
 She had an undulating , but , oftentimes , a sharp and irregular movement .
 It indicated the restless vivacity of her spirit which to-day was doubly indefatigable in its tiptoe dance , because it was played upon and vibrated with her mother’s disquietude .
 Whenever Pearl saw any thing to excite her ever active and wandering curiosity she flew thitherward , and , as we might say , seized upon that man or thing as her own property , so far as she desired it .
 but without yielding the minutest degree of control over her motions in requital .
 The Puritans looked on , and , if they smiled , were none the less inclined to pronounce the child a demon offspring , from the indescribable charm of beauty and eccentricity that shone through her little figure , and sparkled with its activity .
 She ran and looked the wild Indian in the face .
 and he grew conscious of a nature wilder than his own .
 Thence , with native audacity , but still with a reserve as characteristic , she flew into the midst of a group of mariners , the swarthy-cheeked wild men of the ocean , as the Indians were of the land .
 and they gazed wonderingly and admiringly at Pearl , as if a flake of the sea-foam had taken the shape of a little maid , and were gifted with a soul of the sea-fire , that flashes beneath the prow in the night-time .
 
.
 Thy mother is yonder woman with the scarlet letter ,  said the seaman .
 Wilt thou carry her a message from me .
 
.
 If the message pleases me I will ,  answered Pearl .
 
.
 While Hester stood in that magic circle of ignominy , where the cunning cruelty of her sentence seemed to have fixed her for ever , the admirable preacher was looking down from the sacred pulpit upon an audience , whose very inmost spirits had yielded to his control .
 The sainted minister in the church .
 The woman of the scarlet letter in the market-place .
 What imagination would have been irreverent enough to surmise that the same scorching stigma was on them both .
 
.
 In the open air their rapture broke into speech .
 The street and the market-place absolutely babbled , from side to side , with applauses of the minister .
 His hearers could not rest until they had told one another of what each knew better than he could tell or hear .
 According to their united testimony , never had man spoken in so wise , so high , and so holy a spirit , as he that spake this day .
 nor had inspiration ever breathed through mortal lips more evidently than it did through his .
 Its influence could be seen , as it were , descending upon him , and possessing him , and continually lifting him out of the written discourse that lay before him , and filling him with ideas that must have been as marvellous to himself as to his audience .
 His subject , it appeared , had been the relation between the Deity and the communities of mankind , with a special reference to the New England which they were here planting in the wilderness .
 And , as he drew towards the close , a spirit as of prophecy had come upon him , constraining him to its purpose as mightily as the old prophets of Israel were constrained .
 only with this difference , that , whereas the Jewish seers had denounced judgments and ruin on their country , it was his mission to foretell a high and glorious destiny for the newly gathered people of the Lord .
 But , throughout it all , and through the whole discourse , there had been a certain deep , sad undertone of pathos , which could not be interpreted otherwise than as the natural regret of one soon to pass away .
 Yes .
 their minister whom they so loved—and who so loved them all , that he could not depart heavenward without a sigh—had the foreboding of untimely death upon him , and would soon leave them in their tears .
 This idea of his transitory stay on earth gave the last emphasis to the effect which the preacher had produced .
 it was as if an angel , in his passage to the skies , had shaken his bright wings over the people for an instant , —at once a shadow and a splendor , —and had shed down a shower of golden truths upon them .
 
.
 Thus , there had come to the Reverend MrDimmesdale—as to most men , in their various spheres , though seldom recognized until they see it far behind them—an epoch of life more brilliant and full of triumph than any previous one , or than any which could hereafter be .
 He stood , at this moment , on the very proudest eminence of superiority , to which the gifts of intellect , rich lore , prevailing eloquence , and a reputation of whitest sanctity , could exalt a clergyman in New England’s earliest days , when the professional character was of itself a lofty pedestal .
 Such was the position which the minister occupied , as he bowed his head forward on the cushions of the pulpit , at the close of his Election Sermon .
 Meanwhile , Hester Prynne was standing beside the scaffold of the pillory , with the scarlet letter still burning on her breast .
 
.
 Now was heard again the clangor of the music , and the measured tramp of the military escort , issuing from the church-door .
 The procession was to be marshalled thence to the town-hall , where a solemn banquet would complete the ceremonies of the day .
 
.
 How fared it with him then .
 Were there not the brilliant particles of a halo in the air about his head .
 So etherealized by spirit as he was , and so apotheosized by worshipping admirers , did his footsteps in the procession really tread upon the dust of earth .
 
.
 As the ranks of military men and civil fathers moved onward , all eyes were turned towards the point where the minister was seen to approach among them .
 The shout died into a murmur , as one portion of the crowd after another obtained a glimpse of him .
 How feeble and pale he looked amid all his triumph .
 The energy—or say , rather , the inspiration which had held him up , until he should have delivered the sacred message that brought its own strength along with it from Heaven—was withdrawn , now that it had so faithfully performed its office .
 The glow , which they had just before beheld burning on his cheek , was extinguished , like a flame that sinks down hopelessly among the late-decaying embers .
 It seemed hardly the face of a man alive , with such a deathlike hue .
 it was hardly a man with life in him , that tottered on his path so nervelessly , yet tottered , and did not fall .
 
.
 Bellingham , for the last few moments , had kept an anxious eye upon him .
 He now left his own place in the procession , and advanced to give assistance .
 judging from MrDimmesdale’s aspect that he must otherwise inevitably fall .
 But there was something in the latter’s expression that warned back the magistrate , although a man not readily obeying the vague intimations that pass from one spirit to another .
 The crowd , meanwhile , looked on with awe and wonder .
 This earthly faintness was , in their view , only another phase of the minister’s celestial strength .
 nor would it have seemed a miracle too high to be wrought for one so holy , had he ascended before their eyes , waxing dimmer and brighter , and fading at last into the light of Heaven .
 
.
 He turned towards the scaffold , and stretched forth his arms .
 
.
 Hester ,  said he , come hither .
 Come , my little Pearl .
 
.
 It was a ghastly look with which he regarded them .
 but there was something at once tender and strangely triumphant in it .
 The child , with the bird-like motion which was one of her characteristics , flew to him , and clasped her arms about his knees .
 Hester Prynne—slowly , as if impelled by inevitable fate , and against her strongest will—likewise drew near , but paused before she reached him .
 At this instant old Roger Chillingworth thrust himself through the crowd , —or , perhaps , so dark , disturbed , and evil was his look , he rose up out of some nether region , —to snatch back his victim from what he sought to do .
 Be that as it might , the old man rushed forward and caught the minister by the arm .
 
.
 Ha , tempter .
 Methinks thou art too late .
  answered the minister , encountering his eye , fearfully , but firmly .
 Thy power is not what it was .
 With God’s help , I shall escape thee now .
 
.
 He again extended his hand to the woman of the scarlet letter .
 
.
 Hadst thou sought the whole earth over ,  said he , looking darkly at the clergyman , there was no one place so secret , —no high place nor lowly place , where thou couldst have escaped me , —save on this very scaffold .
 
.
 Thanks be to Him who hath led me hither .
  answered the minister .
 
.
 Yet he trembled , and turned to Hester with an expression of doubt and anxiety in his eyes , not the less evidently betrayed , that there was a feeble smile upon his lips .
 
.
 Is not this better ,  murmured he , than what we dreamed of in the forest .
 
.
 Partly supported by Hester Prynne , and holding one hand of little Pearl’s , the Reverend MrDimmesdale turned to the dignified and venerable rulers .
 to the holy ministers , who were his brethren .
 to the people , whose great heart was thoroughly appalled , yet overflowing with tearful sympathy , as knowing that some deep life-matter—which , if full of sin , was full of anguish and repentance likewise—was now to be laid open to them .
 The sun , but little past its meridian , shone down upon the clergyman , and gave a distinctness to his figure , as he stood out from all the earth to put in his plea of guilty at the bar of Eternal Justice .
 
.
 It seemed , at this point , as if the minister must leave the remainder of his secret undisclosed .
 But he fought back the bodily weakness , —and , still more , the faintness of heart , —that was striving for the mastery with him .
 He threw off all assistance , and stepped passionately forward a pace before the woman and the child .
 
.
 With a convulsive motion he tore away the ministerial band from before his breast .
 It was revealed .
 But it were irreverent to describe that revelation .
 For an instant the gaze of the horror-stricken multitude was concentred on the ghastly miracle .
 while the minister stood with a flush of triumph in his face , as one who , in the crisis of acutest pain , had won a victory .
 Then , down he sank upon the scaffold .
 Hester partly raised him , and supported his head against her bosom .
 Old Roger Chillingworth knelt down beside him , with a blank , dull countenance , out of which the life seemed to have departed .
 
.
 Thou hast escaped me .
  he repeated more than once .
 Thou hast escaped me .
 
.
 May God forgive thee .
  said the minister .
 Thou , too , hast deeply sinned .
 
.
 He withdrew his dying eyes from the old man , and fixed them on the woman and the child .
 
.
 Hester ,  said the clergyman , farewell .
 
.
 Shall we not meet again .
  whispered she , bending her face down close to his .
 Shall we not spend our immortal life together .
 Surely , surely , we have ransomed one another , with all this woe .
 Thou lookest far into eternity , with those bright dying eyes .
 Then tell me what thou seest .
 
.
 After many days , when time sufficed for the people to arrange their thoughts in reference to the foregoing scene , there was more than one account of what had been witnessed on the scaffold .
 
.
 Leaving this discussion apart , we have a matter of business to communicate to the reader .
 At old Roger Chillingworth’s decease which took place within the year , and by his last will and testament , of which Governor Bellingham and the Reverend MrWilson were executors , he bequeathed a very considerable amount of property , both here and in England , to little Pearl , the daughter of Hester Prynne .
 
.
 And Hester Prynne had returned , and taken up her long-forsaken shame .
 But where was little Pearl .
 If still alive , she must now have been in the flush and bloom of early womanhood .
 None knew—nor ever learned , with the fulness of perfect certainty—whether the elf-child had gone thus untimely to a maiden grave .
 or whether her wild , rich nature had been softened and subdued , and made capable of a woman’s gentle happiness .
 But , through the remainder of Hester’s life , there were indications that the recluse of the scarlet letter was the object of love and interest with some inhabitant of another land .
 Letters came , with armorial seals upon them , though of bearings unknown to English heraldry .
 In the cottage there were articles of comfort and luxury , such as Hester never cared to use , but which only wealth could have purchased , and affection have imagined for her .
 There were trifles , too , little ornaments , beautiful tokens of a continual remembrance , that must have been wrought by delicate fingers at the impulse of a fond heart .
 And , once , Hester was seen embroidering a baby-garment , with such a lavish richness of golden fancy as would have raised a public tumult , had any infant , thus apparelled , been shown to our sobre-hued community .
 
.
 But there was a more real life for Hester Prynne , here , in New England , than in that unknown region where Pearl had found a home .
 Here had been her sin .
 here , her sorrow .
 and here was yet to be her penitence .
 She had returned , therefore , and resumed , —of her own free will , for not the sternest magistrate of that iron period would have imposed it , —resumed the symbol of which we have related so dark a tale .
 Never afterwards did it quit her bosom .
 But , in the lapse of the toilsome , thoughtful , and self-devoted years that made up Hester’s life , the scarlet letter ceased to be a stigma which attracted the world’s scorn and bitterness , and became a type of something to be sorrowed over , and looked upon with awe , yet with reverence too .
 And , as Hester Prynne had no selfish ends , nor lived in any measure for her own profit and enjoyment , people brought all their sorrows and perplexities , and besought her counsel , as one who had herself gone through a mighty trouble .
 Women , more especially , —in the continually recurring trials of wounded , wasted , wronged , misplaced , or erring and sinful passion , —or with the dreary burden of a heart unyielded , because unvalued and unsought , —came to Hester’s cottage , demanding why they were so wretched , and what the remedy .
 Hester comforted and counselled them , as best she might .
 She assured them , too , of her firm belief , that , at some brighter period , when the world should have grown ripe for it , in Heaven’s own time , a new truth would be revealed , in order to establish the whole relation between man and woman on a surer ground of mutual happiness .
 Earlier in life , Hester had vainly imagined that she herself might be the destined prophetess , but had long since recognized the impossibility that any mission of divine and mysterious truth should be confided to a woman stained with sin , bowed down with shame , or even burdened with a life-long sorrow .
 The angel and apostle of the coming revelation must be a woman , indeed , but lofty , pure , and beautiful .
 and wise , moreover , not through dusky grief , but the ethereal medium of joy .
 and showing how sacred love should make us happy , by the truest test of a life successful to such an end .
 
.
 On a field , sable , the letter A , gules .
 
.
