 A stern-looking king and a plain-looking queen ruled England .
 A stern-looking king and a beautiful queen ruled France .
 In both countries , it seemed obvious to the people managing the royal food supplies that things were stable and nothing would ever change .
 It was 1775 .
 People in England were as superstitious then as they are now .
 MrsSouthcott a woman who claimed to be a prophet MrsSouthcott had just turned twenty-five , and a private in the British army who claimed he could tell the future announced her appearance by saying that London and Westminster would be destroyed .
 Even the Cock Lane Ghost the ghost of a woman believed to haunt a house on Cock Lane Cock Lane Ghost had only been gone twelve years since last tapping out its messages , as the very unoriginal ghosts of last year tapped out theirs .
 A group of British subjects in the American colonies the First Continental Congress group of British subjects in the American colonies had recently sent messages to the King of England , and oddly enough , these earthly messages proved more important than any of the supernatural ones from Cock Lane .
 With their heads bowed down and their tails shaking , the horses stomped their way through the thick mud , struggling and tripping as if they were coming apart at their joints .
 Whenever the coachman stopped them , yelling Wo-ho .
 the lead horse would violently shake his head , as if he were trying to tell the driver that the coach would never make it .
 Each time the lead horse shook like this , one of the nervous passengers would jump , and feel uneasy .
 A steam-like mist moved gloomily up the hill , like a ghost looking for a place to rest , but finding none .
 The mist was cold and damp , and it moved slowly through the air in ripples that flowed on top of one another like the waves of a rough sea .
 It was so thick that all that could be seen by the light of the coach lamps was the mist itself and a few yards of the road .
 Steam rose off the struggling horses and mixed with the mist , as if the mist were coming from the horses themselves .
 The two other passengers , beside the one already mentioned , were also plodding their way up the hill beside the mail coach .
 All three men were bundled up all the way to their ears and wore high boots .
 They were so covered up that not one of them could say what the others looked like , and all were so secretive that their minds were just as hidden as their faces .
 In those days , travelers kept to themselves , because anyone on the road could be a robber or in league with robbers .
 Every inn and alehouse had someone in it working for thieves , from the landlord down to the lowliest stable boyanyone could be a criminal .
 This is what the guard of the Dover mail coach thought to himself that Friday night in November 1775 , as the mail coach lumbered up Shooter's Hill and the guard stood at his place on the back , stomping his feet and staying close to the chest of weapons .
 In the chest was a loaded blunderbuss an early form of shotgun with a short barrel blunderbuss , six or eight handguns , and a layer of swords at the bottom .
 Hello .
 the guard replied .
 What time do you think it is , Joe .
 Ten minutes past eleven .
 The driver struck the lead horse with his whip , and the horse made a strong push up the hill as the other horses followed .
 The Dover mail coach pushed on once again , with the high boots of the passengers squashing through the mud next to it .
 When the coach stopped , the passengers stopped and stayed close beside it .
 If any of them had been brave enough to suggest they walk ahead into the mist and darkness , one of the others would have suspected him of being a highway robber and shot him .
 What is it , Tom .
 They both listened .
 Sounds like a horse trotting toward us , Joe .
 I'd say that horse is moving faster than that , Tom , replied the guard .
 He let go of the door and jumped back to his place on the coach .
 Gentlemen , in the name of the king , get back in the coach .
 With this hurried command , he cocked the gun , and stood ready to fire .
 It became very quiet once the rumbling and struggling of the mail coach had stopped , adding to the stillness of the night .
 The panting of the horses made the mail coach shake as if it , too , were nervous .
 The passengers' hearts beat so loudly it was as if they could be heard outside their bodies .
 But the quietness reflected the emotions of the passengers , who were out of breath , and holding their breath , their heartbeats speeding up in expectation .
 The sound of a horse running came quickly and furiously up the hill .
 Never mind what it is .
 answered the guard .
 Who are you .
 Is that the Dover mail coach .
 Why do you want to know .
 If it is , I'm looking for one of the passengers .
 Which passenger .
 MrJarvis Lorry .
 Our character said that he was MrJarvis Lorry .
 The guard , the driver , and the two other passengers looked at him distrustfully .
 What's the matter .
 asked the passenger , in a slightly trembling voice .
 Who's looking for me .
 Is it Jerry .
 If that is Jerry , I don't like the sound of his voice , the guard muttered to himself .
 It's scratchier than I'd care for .
 Yes , MrLorry .
 What's the matter .
 The figures of a horse and rider came slowly out of the swirling mist and over to the side of the mail coach , where the passenger was standing .
 The rider bent down , and keeping an eye on the guard , handed the passenger a small folded piece of paper .
 The rider's horse was exhausted , and both the horse and rider were covered in mud , from the hoofs of the horse to the rider's hat .
 Guard .
 said the passenger in a confidential tone .
 There's nothing to worry about .
 I work at Tellson's Bank .
 You must know Tellson's Bank in London .
 I'm going to Paris on business .
 I'll give you money to buy yourself a drink .
 Will you let me read this .
 If you do it quickly , sir .
 He opened it in the light of the coach lamp , and read it to himself first and then aloud : ëWait at Dover for Mademoiselle .
 It's a short message , you see , guard .
 Jerry , tell them my answer was ëBrought back to life .
 Jerry jumped in his saddle .
 That's a very strange answer , he said , raspier than ever .
 Give them that reply and they will know that I understood their message as if I'd written it myself .
 Have a good trip back .
 Good night .
 With that , MrLorry opened the coach door and got in .
 He wasn't helped by the other passengers , who had quietly hidden their watches and purses in their boots and were pretending to be asleep .
 They wanted only to avoid trouble .
 Tom .
 said Joe quietly over the top of the coach .
 Yeah , Joe .
 Did you hear that message .
 I did , Joe .
 What do you think it meant , Tom .
 Nothing , Joe .
 That's a coincidence , Joe said , I thought the same thing myself .
 It's amazing to think that every human being is a complete mystery to every other human being .
 When I enter a big city at night , I think how every one of the houses clustered together in the dark holds its own secret inside .
 and every room in every house has its own secret .
 and every one of the thousands of people in the city keeps a secret from those closest to him .
 In a way it's like death .
 When I am dead I can no longer turn the pages of life's book , and vainly hope to read all of it .
 I won't be able to look at the mysteries of life , and catch glimpses of hidden truths .
 Life ends in an instant , when I've only begun to experience it .
 It ends with its mysteries forever unsolved , leaving me without answers .
 The same is true of my friend , neighbor , or dearest love , all of whom will die .
 Death turns the secrets each individual carries into permanent mysteries , just as my secrets will never come out once I've died .
 Are the dead in London's graveyards more mysterious to me than its living inhabitants are , or am I as much of a mystery to those inhabitants myself .
 The messenger rode slowly back , stopping often at alehouses along the way to drink , but keeping to himself , with his hat angled over his eyes .
 His eyes , which fit him well , were solid black and much too close together , as if each eye feared being caught at something if it were too far from the other .
 They peered out menacingly from under his old hat , which was pulled down low and looked like a three-sided spittoon a receptacle for tobacco chewers to spit into three-sided spittoon .
 And they looked out over the large scarf that covered his chin and throat and went down nearly to his knees .
 When he stopped for a drink , he would remove the scarf with his left hand while he drank with his right , and as soon as he was done , he would cover his face again .
 He was so confused by the message that he kept taking off his hat to scratch his head .
 Except on the very top of his head , which was bald , he had stiff , black hair that stuck up in spikes all over his head and grew almost down to his large , wide nose .
 His hair looked so much like metal spikes that the world's best leapfrog players might have refused to jump over him , thinking it too dangerous .
 The mail coach lumbered , jolted , rattled , and bumped along slowly , with its three passengers inside .
 They must have also seen shapes in the forms as they dozed off and let their thoughts wander .
 Although he thought constantly of the bank , and although he remained vaguely aware that he was still in the coach the way you are only vaguely aware of pain when on a pain-killer , another thought ran through his mind all night .
 He had the feeling that he was on his way to dig someone out of a grave .
 Now , although several faces appeared in front of him in the night , he couldn't determine which was the face of the buried person .
 All the faces belonged to a forty-five-year-old man , but they all differed in the expression they wore , and in how worn-out they looked .
 One facial expression followed another : pride , contempt , defiance , stubbornness , submission , and lamentation .
 Some had sunken cheeks , sickly pale skin , hands and bodies that had wasted away .
 But it was almost always the same face , and every head of hair had gone prematurely white .
 In his dream , MrLorry asked the ghostly figure a hundred times : 
.
 How long had you been buried .
 The answer was always the same : Almost eighteen years .
 Had you given up hope of being dug up .
 Yes , a long time ago .
 Do you know that you've been brought back to life .
 That's what they tell me .
 You want to live , don't you .
 I don't know .
 Should I show her to you .
 Will you come see her .
 The ghostly figured answered this question in different and contradictory ways .
 Sometimes he answered weakly : Wait .
 I would die if I saw her too soon .
 Sometimes he cried tenderly and said , Take me to her .
 Sometimes he became confused and answered , I don't know her .
 I don't understand .
 But even when MrLorry was fully awake , looking at the mist and rain , the light from the lamps , the hedge passing by at the roadside , the shadows outside the coach would blend together with the shadows within .
 The real bank at Temple Bar , the real business of the day before , the real bank vaults , the real message he had received , and the real message he sent back would still be there .
 But the ghostly face would rise up and appear to him again .
 How long have you been buried .
 Almost eighteen years .
 You want to live , don't you .
 I don't know .
 How long had you been buried .
 Almost eighteen years .
 Had you given up all hope of being dug out .
 Yes , a long time ago .
 MrLorry could still hear those words , as clearly as if they had just been spoken in real life , when he woke to realize it was daylight , and the shadows of the night were all gone .
 He opened the window and looked out at the rising sun .
 He saw a field , with a plow sitting where it had been left the night before when the horses were untied from it .
 Further in the distance , he saw a quiet forest , where the bright red and golden yellow leaves remained on the trees .
 Though the ground was cold and wet , the sky was clear and the sun rose , bright , calm , and beautiful .
 Eighteen years .
 said the passenger , looking at the sun .
 Good God .
 Imagine being buried alive for eighteen years .
 When the coach reached Dover late in the morning , the head attendant at the Royal George Hotel opened the coach door .
 He did it with a grand gesture , because a trip from London to Dover during the winter was difficult , and making the journey was an achievement worth congratulating .
 Will there be a mail boat to Calais tomorrow , attendant .
 Yes , sir , if we still have good weather and the wind is decent .
 The tide will be good for setting out at about two in the afternoon , sir .
 Would you like a bed , sir .
 The gentleman in the brown suit was the only person in the coffee room that morning .
 His table was near the fire , and he sat so still as he waited for his food that , with the firelight on him , he looked as though he was having his portrait painted .
 Completing his resemblance to a man having his portrait painted , MrLorry fell asleep .
 The arrival of his breakfast woke him , and he said to the attendant , as he moved his chair up to the table : 
.
 I would like you to get a room ready for a young woman who may arrive here at any time today .
 She may ask for MrJarvis Lorry , or she may just ask for a gentleman from Tellson's Bank .
 Please let me know when she arrives .
 Yes , sir .
 Tellson's Bank in London , sir .
 Yes .
 Yes , sir .
 We often have the honor of hosting you gentlemen as you travel between London and Paris , sir .
 Tellson and Company employees travel a great deal , sir .
 Yes .
 We are very much a French business , as well as an English one .
 Yes , sir .
 You don't frequently do the traveling yourself , do you sir .
 Not in recent years .
 It's been fifteen years since wesince Ilast came back from France .
 Really , sir .
 That was before I worked here , sir .
 Before the new owners bought this place , sir .
 The George Hotel was owned by other people back then , sir .
 I believe it was .
 But I would bet , sir , that a bank like Tellson and Company was thriving fifty , not to mention fifteen , years ago .
 You could triple that and say a hundred and fifty .
 Really , sir .
 MrLorry drank a bottle of good red wine after dinner , causing him to lose interest in work .
 He had been sitting there for a long time and had just poured out his last glassful of winewith as happy an expression as any elderly gentleman can have after drinking most of a bottlewhen he heard the rattling of wheels coming up the street and pulling into the inn's yard .
 He put down his glass without drinking .
 Mademoiselle is here .
 he said .
 In just a few minutes the waiter came in to tell him that Miss Manette had arrived from London and would be happy to see him .
 So soon .
 MrLorry tossed back the rest of his wine with an air of calm desperation , straightened his odd little wig over his ears , and followed the waiter to Miss Manette's room .
 The room was large and dark , and it was furnished like a funeral parlor with black horsehair furniture and heavy , dark tables .
 These tables had been oiled repeatedly , so that the two tall candles on the table in the middle of the room were gloomily reflected in the oiled surface .
 The reflections made it look like the candles themselves were buried deep in graves of black mahogany , and they would give off no light until they were dug out .
 I kiss your hand , miss , said MrLorry , in a slightly old-fashioned manner , as he bowed formally again and sat down .
 I received a letter from the bank , sir , yesterday , telling me about some informationor discovery
.
 Ömaking it necessary that I travel to Paris to meet with a gentleman from the bank , who would be sent there to meet with me .
 That's me .
 That's what I thought , sir .
 She curtseyed to him young ladies curtsied in those days to acknowledge how much older and wiser he was than her .
 He bowed to her again .
 I was happy to be given the job , said MrLorry .
 I will be even happier to perform it .
 Of course , said MrLorry .
 After a pause , he adjusted his blond wig around his ears and added , It is very difficult to begin .
 Have we ever met before , sir .
 Would we have .
 MrLorry opened his hands and extended them toward her with an awkward smile .
 If you please , sir .
 Miss Manette , I am a businessman .
 I have a job to do .
 As you listen to me , don't pay any more attention to me than as if I were just a robotreally , I am not much more than that .
 With your permission , miss , I will tell you a story about one of my bank's customers .
 Story .
 Not from Beauvais .
 May I ask , what time this was , sir .
 I'm talking about twenty years ago , miss .
 He married an English lady and I was one of the trustees of their affairs .
 His affairs , like the affairs of many French gentlemen and their families , were entirely in the hands of Tellson's .
 In a similar way , I am , or have been , a trustee of sorts for many of our customers .
 These relationships are entirely business , miss .
 They are not friendships .
 I have moved from one to the next over the course of my work , just as I pass from one customer to the next during my work day .
 In other words , I have no feelings toward these people .
 I am only a machine to continue .
 After this strange description of his work life , MrLorry flattened his blond wig on his head with both hands which was really unnecessary , since it was already as flat as could be and continued .
 So far , miss , as you have said , this is the story you have heard about your poor father .
 This next part is different , though .
 If your father had not died when he didDon't be afraid .
 What a reaction .
 She looked so upset that he lost track of what he was saying , and started over : 
 I beg you to tell me more , sir .
 I will .
 I am going to .
 Can you handle it .
 I can handle anything but the uncertainty you're causing me right now .
 The little child was a daughter , sir .
 For telling me the truth .
 Oh good , kind sir , for telling me the truth .
 Ait's a business matter .
 You're confusing me , and how can I do my job if I'm confused .
 Let's be clear-headed .
 Please tell me now , for instance , how much nine times nine pence is , or how many shillings are in twenty guineas .
 That would make me feel better about your state of mind .
 He felt her grab his wrist tighter and stopped speaking .
 The expression on her forehead , which had so much attracted his attention , had deepened into one of pain and horror .
 A shiver ran through her body and his .
 She said , in a low , clear , awe-struck voice , as if she were in a dream : 
 I am going to see his ghost .
 It will be his ghost , not him .
 MrLorry quietly rubbed her hands , which held his arm .
 There now , there now .
 You know the best and the worst of it now .
 You are well on your way to seeing the poor mistreated gentleman .
 If the journey goes well , you will soon be with him .
 She repeated in the same tone , as low as a whisper , I have been free , I have been happy , but his ghost has never haunted me .
 She sat completely still and silent in her chair , completely shocked .
 Her eyes were open and focused on him , and she still had that expression on her forehead , as if it had been carved or branded there .
 She was holding onto his arm so tightly that he was afraid that if he took it away he would hurt her .
 He stayed still and yelled out for help .
 I think she's actually a man .
 MrLorry thought as he hit the wall .
 Why , look at you all .
 the woman yelled at the inn servants .
 Why don't you go get some things to help her instead of standing there staring at me .
 I am not that pretty , am I .
 Why don't you go get some things to help her .
 I'll teach you a lesson if you don't bring me smelling salts , cold water , and vinegar quickly .
 I hope she'll feel better now , said MrLorry .
 No thanks to you in the bown , if she does , the woman responded .
 My pretty darling .
 I hope you will accompany Miss Manette to France , said MrLorry after another pause of pathetic sympathy and humility .
 Not very likely .
 replied the strong woman .
 If I was supposed to travel overseas , do you suppose Fate would have put me on an island .
 This was another tricky question , and MrJarvis Lorry went away to think about it .
 A large wine cask had been dropped and lay broken in the street .
 The accident happened while people were taking it out of a cart .
 The cask had rolled out quickly , its hoops burst , and it now lay on the stones just outside the door of the wine-shop , shattered like a walnut-shell .
 The red wine had stained the ground where it spilled on the narrow street , in the Paris suburb of Saint Antoine .
 It had stained many hands , faces , bare feet , and wooden shoes , too .
 The hands of the man who sawed wood left red marks on the logs .
 The forehead of the woman who nursed her baby was stained from the old rag she wrapped around her head again .
 Those who had greedily chewed on pieces of the cask now had a tiger-like smear across their mouths .
 One tall prankster wearing a long , filthy nightcap dipped his finger in the mixture of mud and wine and wrote the word blood on a wall .
 The time would come when blood , too , would be spilled on the streets , and many of the people would be stained with it .
 The man pointed proudly to the word he had written , as pranksters often do .
 The joke failed , as pranksters' jokes often do as well .
 What are you doing .
 Are you crazy .
 said the owner of the wine shop , crossing the road and covering the word with a handful of mud .
 Why are you writing this in public .
 Tell me , is there no other place you can write such words .
 While he was talking , he placed his clean hand possibly by accident , possibly not over the prankster's heart .
 The prankster tapped it with his own hand , jumped up quickly , and landed in a strange dancing pose , holding one of his stained shoe in his hand threateningly .
 The prankster was a resourceful man .
 He looked around and saw an old gentleman and a young woman sitting in the corner .
 Other people were in the shop too : two were playing cards , two were playing dominoes , and three were standing by the counter trying to make the most of a small amount of wine .
 As he stepped behind the counter , he noticed the old gentleman give a look to the young woman as if to say , This is the man we're looking for .
 What the devil are you doing here .
 Monsieur Defarge thought .
 I don't know you .
 He pretended not to notice the two strangers and went to talk with the three customers drinking at the counter .
 How's it going , Jacques .
 said one of the three to Monsieur Defarge .
 Has all the spilled wine been drunk .
 Every drop , Jacques , answered Monsieur Defarge .
 After this greeting by first names , Madame Defarge , while picking her teeth with her toothpick , cleared her throat again and raised her eyebrows a bit higher .
 It is not often , the second man said to Monsieur Defarge , that these pathetic creatures get to taste wine , or anything besides black bread and death .
 Don't you agree , Jacques .
 That's true , Jacques , Monsieur Defarge returned .
 After this second exchange of first names , Madame Defarge , still calmly picking her teeth , cleared her throat again and raised her eyebrows a bit higher .
 Ah .
 That's even worse .
 These poor animals always have a sour taste in their mouths , and their lives are hard , Jacques .
 Am I right , Jacques .
 You are right , Jacques , answered Monsieur Defarge .
 They completed this third exchange of first names just as Madame Defarge put down her toothpick and shifted slightly in her seat , with her eyebrows still up .
 The three customers took off their hats and gestured grandly to Madame Defarge .
 She acknowledged their respect by bowing her head and giving them a quick look .
 Then she looked casually around the wine shop and calmly went back to her knitting .
 Good day , gentlemen , said her husband , who had been watching her carefully .
 The apartment you had asked about while I was out is on the fifth floor .
 The doorway of the staircase opens out onto a little courtyard close to the left here , near the window of my shop , he said , pointing with his hand .
 But now I remember that one of you has been there before and can lead way .
 Goodbye , gentlemen .
 They paid for the wine and left .
 Monsieur Defarge was watching his wife knit when the old gentleman came over and asked to speak with him .
 Of course , sir , Monsieur Defarge said and walked quietly with him to the door .
 Their conversation was short but to the point .
 Almost at the first word , Monsieur Defarge jumped to attention .
 Moments later , he nodded and went out .
 The gentleman motioned to the young lady , and they also went out .
 Madame Defarge kept knitting and pretended not to notice .
 MrJarvis Lorry and Miss Manette came out of the wine shop and joined Monsieur Defarge in the doorway he had just directed the three customers to .
 It opened onto a dark , stinking little courtyard that served as the public entrance to many houses , where a great number of people lived .
 In the gloomy tiled entry to the gloomy tiled staircase , Monsieur Defarge bent down on one knee in front of the child of his old master and kissed her hand .
 Though the gesture was kind , he didn't do it kindly .
 In just a few seconds , he had changed .
 His face was no longer pleasant or friendly , but had become secretive , angry , and dangerous .
 Is he alone .
 MrLorry whispered .
 Alone .
 God help him , who would be with him .
 said Monsieur Defarge , in the same quiet voice .
 Is he always alone .
 Yes .
 By his own choice .
 He needs to be .
 He's been the same since I first saw himsince they found me and asked if I would take care of him in secret .
 Has he changed much .
 Changed .
 Monsieur Defarge stopped to hit the wall with his hand , and he cursed .
 No direct answer could have been half as effective .
 MrLorry's mood grew grimmer as he and the two others climbed the stairs .
 An old staircase like this one , located in the older and more crowded parts of Paris , would be bad enough today 1859 today .
 But back then they were particularly disgusting , especially to people who weren't used to them .
 Every little apartment in one of these large buildings that opened onto the public staircase dumped its garbage on the landing .
 Other refuse got thrown out the windows .
 This unmanageable and hopeless pile of rotting garbage would have polluted the air even if it had not been the garbage of the poor , but the combination of trash and poverty made the smell almost unbearable .
 The three people walked through all this filth and up a steep , dark , dirty stairwell .
 Giving in to his own troubled thoughts and to Miss Manette's anxiety , which became greater every moment , MrJarvis Lorry stopped twice to rest .
 Each stop was made near a miserable air vent , through which any clean air that was left seemed to escape , and through which rotten air seemed to enter .
 Through the air vents you could taste , rather than see , parts of the neighborhood .
 Nothing nearby , from that spot to the great towers of Notre Dame , showed any signs of good health or good thoughts .
 Then the door is locked , my friend .
 asked MrLorry , surprised .
 You think it's necessary to keep the poor gentleman locked up .
 Why .
 Because he has been locked up for so long that he would be afraid , go mad , tear himself apart , die , or some other terrible thing if his door were left open .
 Is that possible .
 exclaimed MrLorry .
 Be brave , miss .
 Courage .
 This is business .
 The worst part will be over in a moment .
 It's just walking into a room , and the worst is over .
 Then , all the goodness , all the relief , all the happiness you'll bring him will begin .
 Let our good friend here help you .
 Our good friend Monsieur Defarge .
 Come , now .
 Business , business .
 I forgot about them when your visit surprised me , explained Monsieur Defarge .
 Go away , my friends .
 we have business here .
 The three men slipped past and went silently downstairs .
 Since there didn't appear to be any other doors on that floor , and the wine-shop owner went straight to this one when they were alone , MrLorry asked him in a whisper , a little angry : 
.
 Are you making a spectacle of Monsieur Manette .
 I show him , in the way you just saw , to a select few .
 Is that proper .
 I think it's proper .
 Who are the few .
 How do you select them .
 He motioned for them to stay back , then leaned over and looked in through the crack in the wall .
 Soon he raised his head and knocked two or three times on the doorapparently just to make noise .
 For this same reason , he dragged the key across the door three or four times before clumsily putting it in the lock and loudly turning it .
 He slowly opened the door slowly , looked into the room , and said something .
 A quiet voice answered back .
 Neither person spoke much more than a syllable .
 A-a-a-business , business .
 he said , with a tear on his cheek that had nothing to do with business .
 Come in .
 I'm afraid of it , she answered , trembling .
 Of it' .
 Of what .
 I mean of him .
 Of my father .
 Concerned by the state she was in and by the gesturing of Monsieur Defarge , MrLorry pulled her arm around his neck , lifted her slightly , and rushed her into the room .
 He sat her down just inside the door and held her as she clung to him .
 Defarge took out the key , closed the door , and locked it from the inside .
 Then he took the key and held it in his hand .
 He did all of this methodically , making as much noise as he could .
 Finally he crossed the room to the window , where he stopped and turned around .
 Good day .
 said Monsieur Defarge to the white-haired man , who was bent over making shoes .
 The man looked up for a moment and answered quietly , as if he were far away : 
 Good day .
 You are still hard at work , I see .
 His voice was so quiet it was pitiful and dreadful .
 It wasn't quiet because the man was physically weak , although being locked up and treated badly had done their part .
 His voice was quiet because he had been kept alone and hadn't used it .
 It was like the last feeble echo of a sound made a long , long time ago .
 It had lost so much of its liveliness and sound that it was like a beautiful color that has faded away to a faint stain .
 It was so low that it sounded like it was coming from underground .
 It was so sad and hopeless that it would have reminded a starving traveler , exhausted by wandering in the wilderness , of his home and friends just before he lied down to die .
 I want to let a little more light in here , said Defarge , who was still staring at the shoemaker .
 Can you handle a little more light .
 What did you say .
 Can you stand a little more light .
 Defarge propped the half door open a little more .
 A broad shaft of light came into the attic and revealed the shoemaker with an unfinished shoe in his lap as he paused his work .
 A few basic tools and some leather scraps were around him at his feet and on the bench .
 He had a white , ragged beard that wasn't very long , a thin face , and very bright eyes .
 The emptiness and thinness of his face would ordinarily have made his eyes look large under his dark eyebrows and tangled white hair .
 But they were naturally large , so now they looked unnaturally big .
 His yellow , tattered shirt was open at the throat , showing that his body was skinny and worn out .
 The old man , his old coat , his baggy stockings , and his tattered clothes had all been away from light and air for so long that they had turned a single shade of yellow , making it hard to distinguish one from the other .
 He raised his hand to shield his eyes from the light , and even the bones of it seemed transparent .
 He had stopped working and sat there with a steady , empty look .
 He never looked at the man in front of him without first looking down on this side of himself , then on the other , as if he had forgotten how to tell where sound was coming from .
 He never said anything without doing this first , then forgetting to speak .
 Are you going to finish that pair of shoes today .
 asked Defarge , motioning to MrLorry to come forward .
 What did you say .
 Do you plan on finishing that pair of shoes today .
 I can't say that I plan to .
 I guess so .
 I don't know .
 The question reminded him of his work , and he bent over the shoes and started working again .
 You have a visitor , you see , said Monsieur Defarge .
 What did you say .
 There is a visitor here to see you .
 The shoemaker looked up as he had before , but without taking his hand off the shoes .
 Come .
 said Defarge .
 Here is a man who knows a well-made shoe when he sees one .
 Show him that shoe you're working on .
 Take it , monsieur .
 MrLorry took the shoe in his hand .
 Tell this man what kind of shoe it is and who made it .
 There was a longer pause than usual before the shoemaker answered : 
 I forget what you asked me .
 What did you say .
 I said , won't you describe to this man what kind of shoe it is .
 And who made it .
 asked Defarge .
 Did you ask me what my name was .
 Yes , I did .
 My name is One Hundred and Five , North Tower .
 Is that it .
 One Hundred and Five , North Tower .
 With a weary sound that wasn't a sigh or a groan he resumed working , until the silence was broken again .
 You're not a professional shoemaker , are you .
 asked MrLorry , staring at him .
 Am I professional shoemaker .
 No , I was not a professional shoemaker .
 I-I learned how to make shoes here .
 I taught myself .
 I asked permission to .
 He stared off for a few minutes , wringing his hands the whole time .
 Slowly he looked back toward MrLorry .
 When he looked at him he flinched and started up again as if he had just been woken up and was continuing a conversation from the night before .
 Monsieur Manette dropped the shoe and sat staring at MrLorry .
 His mind clouded over again .
 He looked at the two men with less and less understanding , and his eyes wandered back to the ground the way they had before .
 Finally , sighing deeply , he picked up the shoe and went back to work .
 Did you recognize him , monsieur .
 whispered Defarge .
 Miss Manette had moved away from the attic wall and was very close to the bench he sat on .
 There was something terrible about the fact that he was unaware of someone so close she could have reached out and touched him .
 After a while he put down the tool in his hand to pick up his shoemaker's knife .
 It was on the side of the bench opposite where she stood .
 He had picked it up and was leaning over to start working again when he noticed the bottom of her dress .
 He looked up and saw her face .
 MrLorry and Defarge started to move forward to protect her , but she stopped them with a motion of her hand .
 She didn't fear him stabbing her with his knife , though the two men did .
 What is this .
 With tears running down her face , she blew him a kiss with both hands .
 Then she placed her hands on her heart as if she were holding his head to it .
 You aren't the jailer's daughter .
 No , she sighed .
 Who are you .
 Still afraid to speak , she sat down next to him on the bench .
 He pulled away , but she placed her hand on his arm .
 As she did , a strange excitement struck him , and passed through him visibly .
 He gently put down the knife and sat there staring at her .
 Her long , curly blond hair had been brushed aside and fell down over her neck .
 Moving his hand toward her little by little , he picked up her hair and looked at it .
 While doing this , his mind wandered again , and with another deep sigh , he went back to his shoemaking .
 He took her hair in his hand again and looked closely at it .
 It's the same .
 How can that be .
 When .
 How .
 As the intense expression reappeared on his forehead , he seemed to realize that the same expression was on her forehead too .
 He moved her into the light and looked at her .
 He formed these words silently with his lips many times before he could say them out loud .
 When he did finally speak them , he said them clearly , though slowly .
 How did this happen .
 WAS IT YOU .
 Listen .
 Monsieur Manette cried .
 Whose voice was that .
 No , no , no .
 You are too young .
 Too full of life .
 It can't be you .
 These are not the hands she knew , this is not the face she knew , this is not a voice she ever heard .
 No , no .
 She was , and he was , before all those slow-moving years I spent in the North Toweryears ago .
 What is your name , my gentle angel .
 Noticing that he had softened his tone of voice and behavior , his daughter fell down on her knees in front of him and placed her hands on his chest .
 His cold white hair mixed with her shining blond hair , and it was as if her hair warmed his like the light of freedom shining on him .
 If my voiceI don't know if it does , but if soif it reminds you of a voice that was once sweet music in your ears , cry for it .
 If touching my hair reminds you of the head that once rested on your chest when you were young and free , cry for it .
 If I hint that a home awaits you where I will take care of you , and it reminds you of the long-empty home you remembered from afar , cry for it .
 She hugged him around the neck and rocked him back and forth like a child .
 I tell you that your agony is over , and that I've come here to take you from it , and that we're going to England to be at peace .
 If that causes you to think of your wasted life , and how our home country , France , has mistreated you , cry for it .
 When I tell you my name , and about my father who is living , and about my mother who is dead , if you find out that I must beg my father's forgiveness because I didn't stay awake crying all night since my mother never told me of his imprisonment , cry for it .
 Cry for her , then , and for me .
 Gentlemen , thank God .
 I feel God's tears on my face and his sobbing in my heart .
 Thank God .
 More fit to travel , I think , than to stay in this city , where he has been treated so terribly .
 That's a business matter , said MrLorry , going back to his professional demeanor .
 And if business needs to be done , then I should be the one to do it .
 As it grew dark , the young woman lay her head down on the hard ground next to her father and watched him .
 It got darker and darker , and they both lay there quietly until a light shone through the cracks in the wall .
 In the way of a man used to obeying orders , he ate and drank what they gave him , and put on the cloak and other clothes they gave him to wear .
 He happily let his daughter link arms with him and held her hand with both of his .
 Do you remember this place , father .
 Do you remember coming up here .
 What did you say .
 But before she could repeat the question , he mumbled an answer .
 Do I remember .
 No , I don't remember .
 It was such a long time ago .
 Defarge climbed up on the coach and yelled , To the barrier .
 The driver cracked his whip , and the coach drove off under the dim swinging streetlamps .
 Don't you want to be brought back to life .
 And he got the same answer as before : 
 I don't know .
 The end of Book One .
 Tellson's Bank near Temple Bar was an old-fashioned place , even back in 1780 .
 It was very small , very dark , very ugly , and very uncomfortable .
 The partners who ran the bank were old-fashioned too .
 They were proud of its smallness , darkness , ugliness , and discomfort .
 They even boasted that their bank was all these things , and they believed that it if hadn't been so unpleasant , it wouldn't have been so well respected .
 The bankers liked to brag about this to their competitors .
 Tellson's Bank , they would say , didn't need elbow room or bright light or fancy decorations .
 Maybe Noakes and Co .
 or Snooks Brothers needed these things , but not Tellson's Bank .
 Any one these partners would have disinherited his own son for suggesting they refurbish Tellson's .
 In this way , Tellson's was like England , which did often punish its citizens for trying to improve laws and customs .
 But the fact that people had objected to these laws and customs for so long made them more respected .
 The old men who worked in the cramped quarters of Tellson's Bank took their work seriously .
 When the bank hired a young man , they hid him away until he was old .
 When they hired a young man at Tellson's London office , they kept him in a dark place and aged him , like a cheese , until he had the Tellson-flavor and mold grew on him .
 Only then was he allowed to be seen there , studying large books and strutting around with an air of self-importance .
 MrCruncher's apartment was not in a very good neighborhood .
 It had only two rooms , and only if a closet with a tiny window counted as one of them .
 He kept his apartment clean , though .
 As early as it was this windy March morning , his bedroom was already scrubbed clean , and the cups and saucers were set out for breakfast on a clean white tablecloth .
 MrCruncher was asleep under a patchwork quilt , like a Harlequin a clown from Italian comedy that wore a costume made up of multicolored patches Harlequin at home .
 He was sleeping heavily , but little by little he began to toss and turn in bed , with his spiky hair looking like it would tear his sheets to shreds .
 Finally he sat up and yelled out in frustration : 
 Bust me , if she isn't at it again .
 A neatly dressed woman quickly got up off her knees in the corner , with enough speed and fear to show that she was the woman he referred to .
 What .
 said MrCruncher , looking around the bed for his boot .
 You're at it again , are you .
 I was only praying .
 Praying .
 You're a nice woman .
 What are you doing throwing yourself down on your knees and praying against me .
 I'm not praying against you .
 I was praying for you .
 They come from the heart , Jerry .
 They're only worth what they mean to me .
 Muttering other phrases like Oh , yes .
 You're a religious woman , aren't you .
 You would never go against the best interests of your husband and child , would you .
 Not you .
 and making other such sarcastic comments , MrCruncher went about cleaning his boots and getting ready for work .
 Meanwhile , his son , whose hair was slightly less spiked than his father's and whose eyes were close together like his father's , watched his mother as he had been told .
 He kept surprising her by jumping out of his little bedroom where he was washing up and yelling , You were about to kneel down and pray , Mother .
 Hey .
 Father .
 and then , after yelling out this false warning , jumping back into the other room again with a grin .
 MrCruncher was still in a bad mood when he came to eat breakfast .
 He was particularly angry when MrsCruncher said grace .
 His wife explained to him that she was only asking for a blessing .
 Don't do it .
 said MrCruncher while he looked around , as if he expected his wife's prayers to make the loaf of bread on the table disappear .
 I'm not going to let myself be blessed out of house and home .
 I won't let you bless my food right off of my table .
 Keep quiet .
 Blurry-eyed and sullen , as if he had been up all night at a party that had ended badly , Jerry Cruncher ate his breakfast anxiously , growling over it like an animal .
 Around nine o'clock he calmed himself down and , making himself as respectable and professional looking as he could , went out to start his day .
 One of the regular messengers that worked in the bank poked his head out the door and said : 
 We need a porter .
 Hooray , Father .
 Here's an early job to start the day with .
 Having sent his father off , young Jerry sat on the stool , looked at the straw his father had been chewing on , and thought .
 You know the Old Bailey street in London where criminals were tried and imprisoned Old Bailey , don't you .
 one of the bank's oldest clerks asked Jerry .
 Ye-es , sir , answered Jerry , warily .
 I do know the Old Bailey .
 I thought so .
 And you know MrLorry .
 Good .
 Go find the door where they bring the witnesses in , and show the doorman this note for MrLorry .
 He will let you in .
 Into the courtroom , sir .
 MrCruncher narrowed his eyes , as if his eyes were asking each other , What do you think about this .
 Should I wait for him in court , sir .
 MrCruncher asked .
 Is that all , sir .
 That's all .
 He wants a messenger nearby .
 Your job is to let him know that you're there if he needs you .
 I guess they're trying people for forgery this morning .
 That's punishable by quartering dismembering a body into four parts quartering , said Jerry .
 How barbaric .
 It's the law , answered the old clerk , surprised at this comment .
 The law is the law .
 It's a harsh law .
 It's bad enough to kill him , but it's worse to torture him , sir .
 It's this damp weather , sir , that affects my health , said Jerry .
 My job often requires me to be out in wet weather .
 After a few moments , the doorman reluctantly opened the door a little way and allowed MrJerry Cruncher to squeeze into the courtroom .
 What case is this .
 Jerry whispered to the man next to him .
 Nothing yet .
 What case is next .
 The treason case .
 The one where they're going to quarter the man .
 If they decide he's guilty , you mean .
 asked Jerry .
 What's he got to do with this case .
 the man next to Jerry asked about MrLorry .
 I have no idea , said Jerry .
 What do you have to do with it , if I may ask .
 I don't know that either , said Jerry .
 A mirror hung over the prisoner's head to reflect light down onto him .
 Over the years this mirror had reflected the images of many poor and wicked prisoners who had eventually been put to death .
 If that mirror were ever able to send those reflections back out , the courtroom would have been filled with ghosts .
 The prisoner may have thought about how disgraceful it was to have this mirror there .
 He shifted and a shaft of light shining across his face made him look up .
 When he saw his reflection , he blushed and brushed the herbs off of the bar in front of him .
 As he made this gesture , he turned his face to his left .
 His eyes fell upon two people sitting near the judge's bench .
 His expression changed so much when he saw them that everyone who was watching turned to look .
 The two people were a young lady a little older than twenty years old and a gentleman who was apparently her father .
 He was a remarkable-looking man with white hair and an indescribable intensity in his face .
 This intense expression made him look like an old man .
 But when the expression left his face , as it had now while he talked to his daughter , he looked handsome and in the prime of his life .
 His daughter sat arm in arm with her father .
 Her fear and pity for the prisoner had made her pull close to him .
 The expression on her forehead revealed her compassion for the prisoner .
 This expression was so heartbreaking that it moved even those people who had had no pity for the prisoner .
 The crowd whispered to one another , Who are they .
 Jerry , who had been observing the scene while he sucked the rust off of his fingers , leaned in to hear who they were .
 The crowd around him had passed the question forward to the person closest to the two people .
 The answer was slowly passed back until it got to Jerry : 
 They are witnesses .
 Against .
 Against which side .
 Against the prisoner .
 When the attorney general finished , the crowd started to buzz with excitement , like a cloud of flies , in anticipation of the prisoner's death .
 When the noise died down , the ideal patriot the attorney general had described entered the witness box .
 The man asked John Barsad if he had ever been a spy himself .
 No , Barsad answered indignantly .
 How did he make his living .
 He made his living off of his property .
 Where was his property .
 He didn't quite remember .
 What was this property .
 No one's business .
 Had he inherited it .
 Yes , he had .
 From whom .
 A distant relative .
 Very distant .
 Yes , very distant .
 Had he ever been in prison .
 Of course not .
 He had never been to debtor's prison .
 He didn't see what that has to do with it .
 So he'd never been to debtor's prison .
 He asked that the question be repeated .
 Never been to debtor's prison .
 Yes .
 How many times .
 Two or three times .
 Not five or six times .
 Maybe .
 What's your profession .
 I am a gentleman .
 Have you been ever been kicked in a fight .
 Maybe .
 Often .
 No .
 Ever been kicked down a flight of stairs .
 Of course not .
 Once , though , someone kicked me at the top of a staircase and I happened to fall down the stairs on my own .
 Were you kicked because you'd been caught cheating at dice .
 That's what the drunken liar who kicked me said , but it wasn't true .
 You swear it wasn't true .
 Definitely .
 Ever make money by cheating at gambling .
 Never .
 Ever make money by gambling .
 No more than other gentlemen .
 Ever borrow money from the prisoner .
 Yes .
 Ever pay him back .
 No .
 Wasn't your familiarity with the prisoner actually very limited , created by you deliberately bumping into him in coaches , inns , and ships .
 No .
 Are you sure you saw the prisoner with these lists .
 I'm sure .
 You didn't know anything else about these lists .
 No .
 You didn't get them yourself , for instance .
 No .
 Do you expect to get anything in return for testifying against him .
 No .
 You're not employed by the British government to entrap people .
 Of course not .
 Or to do anything else .
 No .
 You swear .
 I'll swear it over and over again .
 You have no motives for doing this other than love for your country .
 None whatsoever .
 There was another buzz in the courtroom , and the attorney general called MrJarvis Lorry to the stand .
 MrJarvis Lorry , are you a clerk at Tellson's Bank .
 I am .
 On a certain Friday night in November 1775 , did your job require that you take the mail coach from London to Dover .
 It did .
 Were there any other passengers in the coach .
 Two other passengers .
 Did they get out of the coach at some point during the night .
 Yes , they did .
 MrLorry , look at the prisoner .
 Was he one of those two passengers .
 I don't know .
 Does he resemble either of the two passengers .
 Both of them were bundled up , it was dark , and we all kept to ourselves , so I can't be sure if he looked like one of the passengers or not .
 MrLorry , imagine the prisoner wrapped up like those two passengers .
 Is there anything about his build or height that would make you think that he was not one of them .
 No .
 MrLorry , you cannot say for sure that he was not one of those two men .
 No .
 So you're saying he might have been one of them .
 Yes .
 Except that I remember them both being afraid of thieves , like I was , and the prisoner doesn't look like a man who's afraid of anything .
 Did you ever see someone pretend to be afraid , MrLorry .
 I certainly have .
 MrLorry , look at the prisoner again .
 Have you ever seen him before .
 I have .
 When .
 What time did he come on board .
 A little after midnight .
 In the middle of the night .
 Was he the only passenger that came on board so late .
 Forget about whether he ëhappened' to be the only one .
 Was he the only passenger to come on board in the middle of the night .
 Yes , he was .
 Were you traveling alone , MrLorry , or were you with someone .
 I was with two other people .
 A gentleman and a lady .
 They are here in the courtroom .
 They are here .
 Did you speak with the prisoner .
 The young woman , whom everyone had been watching earlier , stood up , and the crowd turned to look at her .
 Her father stood up with her and kept his hand linked through her arm .
 Miss Manette , take a look at the prisoner .
 To look at such a young , beautiful woman with such pity in her eyes was harder for the prisoner than the stares of the entire crowd .
 He couldn't stand still while looking at her , knowing he was about to die and knowing that everyone was watching him .
 He brushed the herbs in front of him into little lines , like beds of flowers in a garden .
 His lips trembled as he tried to steady his breathing .
 The crowd started to buzz again .
 Miss Manette , have you seen the prisoner before .
 Yes , sir .
 Where .
 You are the young woman MrLorry referred to .
 Oh .
 Unfortunately , I am .
 Miss Manette , did you talk to the prisoner at all during the journey across the Channel .
 Yes , sir .
 Describe the conversation .
 The courtroom was silent as she began quietly : When the gentleman came on board .
 By ëgentleman , ' do you mean the prisoner .
 asked the judge , frowning .
 Yes , my lord .
 Then say ëthe prisoner .
 Let me interrupt you for a moment .
 Did he come on board alone .
 No .
 How many people were with him .
 Two French gentlemen .
 Did they speak together .
 They spoke together until the very last moment , when the two French gentlemen took their boat back to shore .
 They passed some papers between them , but I don't know what they were .
 Were they the same shape and size as these papers .
 Tell us about your conversation with the prisoner , Miss Manette .
 The courtroom buzzed with excitement .
 Did he say anything about America , Miss Manette .
 Be specific .
 A crowd will always mimic the expression on the face of an actor in a play they are watching .
 Miss Manette's forehead was wrinkled up as she gave her evidence , waited for the judge to write down what she said , and watched the lawyers to see how they would react .
 All the people in the crowd had the same expression on their foreheads , as if they were mirrors reflecting Miss Manette .
 The judge looked up , angered by the comment about George Washington .
 Can you identify him as the man you met on board the boat from Calais , or verify that he had this conversation with your daughter .
 I can't do either , sir .
 Is there some reason why .
 There is , he answered quietly .
 A long imprisonment , he answered in a tone that provoked pity .
 Had you just been released on the night in question .
 That's what they tell me .
 Do you remember that night .
 Not at all .
 I don't remember anything from a long periodI can't even say how long .
 I've forgotten everything from the time when I was making shoes in prison to when I found myself living in London with my daughter .
 I began to recognize her when I started to get my senses back .
 I have no memory of how it happened , though .
 The witness said he was sure .
 Have you ever seen anyone who looked like the prisoner .
 Not so much like him that I could confuse the two , said the witness .
 Look closely at my esteemed friend over there , he said , pointing to the man who had tossed the paper .
 Now look closely at the prisoner .
 Do they look like each other .
 But MrCarton was paying closer attention to the scene than it appeared .
 When Miss Manette dropped her head onto her father's chest , he was the first person to say loudly , Officer .
 Assist that young woman .
 Help the gentleman take her out of the room .
 Can't you see she's about to faint .
 The crowd was very sympathetic to her and her father as they left the courtroom .
 It had apparently been very stressful for him to think back on his time in prison .
 The questioning had clearly upset him , and that thoughtful or brooding expression that made him look older had been on his face ever since .
 As he was leaving , the foreman spoke on behalf of the jury , who were once again facing forward .
 Jerry , you can go get something to eat , but stay close by .
 I'm sure you will hear when the jury comes in .
 Get back here as soon as they do .
 I want you to take the verdict back to the bank .
 You're the fastest messenger I know , and you'll get back to Temple Bar much faster than I can .
 MrLorry gave him a shilling , and Jerry agreed to deliver the message .
 At that moment , MrCarton came up to MrLorry and tapped him on the arm .
 How is the young lady .
 She's very upset , but her father is comforting her .
 She feels better now that she is out of the courtroom .
 I'll tell the prisoner .
 It wouldn't be proper if people saw a respectable banker like you speaking to him in public .
 The prisoner immediately stepped forward .
 I'm sure you are anxious to hear how the witness , Miss Manette , is doing .
 She is doing very well .
 She got through the worst of it .
 I am very sorry that I caused her distress .
 Could you tell her for me , with my sincerest apologies .
 MrCarton's attitude was so casual that it was almost rude .
 He stood there , partly facing away from the prisoner , leaning with his elbow against the bar .
 I would like that .
 Thank you .
 Guilty .
 It's smart of you to expect that , as it's the most likely .
 But I think their long deliberation could work in your favor .
 MrLorry was already calling for him when he arrived .
 I'm here , sir .
 It's a fight to get back through this crowd .
 Here I am , sir .
 MrLorry handed a piece of paper to him through the crowd .
 Quick .
 Do you have it .
 Yes , sir .
 The word Acquitted had been quickly scribbled down on the paper .
 If you had sent the message ëBrought back to life' again I would have understood it this time , muttered Jerry .
 Jerry didn't have time to say or think anything else until he was out of the Old Bailey .
 The crowd came pouring out of the courtroom so quickly that they nearly knocked him over , and their loud buzz spread into the streets as if they were flies in search of other carrion .
 Only his daughter could bring him back from this melancholy brooding .
 She was the one thing that connected his past , before his imprisonment , to his present .
 The sound of her voice , the look on her face , or the touch of her hand almost always made him feel better .
 There had a few times when she hadn't been able to help him , but these instances were rare and she felt they were now over .
 MrStryver still wore his wig and gown , and he stood in front of MrDarnay in such a way that MrLorry was edged out of the conversation entirely .
 I am happy I represented you honorably , MrDarnay , said MrStryver .
 It was a villainous case they had against you , but that doesn't mean they couldn't have succeeded .
 I am indebted to your for life , in two senses of the word , said MrDarnay , shaking his hand .
 Do you think so .
 asked MrStryver .
 Well .
 You've been here all day and you ought to know .
 You're a businessman , too .
 Speak for yourself , MrLorry , said Stryver .
 I have work to do tonight .
 Speak for yourself .
 The look faded from his face , and he turned to look at her .
 Shall we go home , Father .
 Yes , he answered with a long sigh .
 Nobody had mentioned the role MrCarton had played in the events of the day .
 Nobody had noticed him there .
 He wasn't wearing his robe anymore and looked worse than he had in the courtroom .
 If you knew how conflicted businessmen become when they are caught between doing the right thing and the professional thing , you would find it funny , MrDarnay , said MrCarton .
 MrLorry blushed and said in a friendly manner , You have said that before , sir .
 We men of business , who work for a company , cannot think only of ourselves .
 We have to think of what's best for the company .
 Business .
 I have no business , said MrCarton .
 It's a shame that you don't , sir , said MrLorry .
 I think so , too .
 If you did have business , continued MrLorry , perhaps you could go take care of it .
 MrLorry may have been mad at both himself and MrCarton , and he climbed into the chair and headed off to Tellson's Bank .
 Carton , who smelled like port wine and appeared to be a bit drunk , laughed and turned to Darnay : 
 It's pretty odd that you and I are here together .
 This must be a strange night for you , standing here alone on the street with a man who looks just like you .
 I still don't feel like I belong to the world of the living , answered Charles Darnay .
 I'm not surprised .
 It wasn't long ago that you were close to being put to death .
 Your voice is weak .
 I feel weak .
 Then why don't you eat dinner .
 I ate dinner myself while those idiots in the jury were arguing about whether you should live or die .
 Let me show you the closest good tavern .
 Do you feel like you belong to the world of the living yet , MrDarnay .
 You must be very happy about that .
 He spoke bitterly and refilled his large wine glass .
 MrDarnay was confused by the emotions of the day , and it felt like a dream to be with this man who looked so much like himself , but behaved so roughly .
 He didn't know how to respond to this statement , and finally , he decided not to answer at all .
 To Miss Manette , then .
 To Miss Manette .
 Staring into MrDarnay's face while he drank to the toast , Carton flung his wine glass over his shoulder against the wall , where it shattered .
 Then he rang the bell and ordered another .
 That's a beautiful young lady to send away in a coach at night , MrDarnay .
 he said , handling his new glass .
 Yes , said MrDarnay , frowning slightly .
 Again Darnay didn't answer .
 She was very happy to receive your message when I gave it to her .
 She didn't show that she was pleased , but I think she was .
 This comment reminded Darnay that Carton had helped him by delivering this message .
 He turned the conversation to that fact and thanked him for his help .
 I don't want or deserve any thanks , he said casually .
 First of all , it was nothing .
 And second , I don't even know why I did it .
 Let me ask you a question , MrDarnay .
 Do you think that I like you .
 Really , MrCarton , answered MrDarnay , a bit flustered by the question , I haven't thought much about it .
 Think about it now .
 I don't think I do like you , said Carton .
 I'm starting to think highly of your intelligence .
 Carton answered , Not on your life .
 Darnay rang the bell .
 Do you call us even .
 MrDarnay answered that yes , he did .
 Then bring me another pint of this wine , waiter , and wake me in my room at ten o'clock .
 I think you have been drinking , MrCarton .
 You think .
 You know I have been drinking .
 Yes , I know it .
 Then I will tell you why .
 I am unhappy and overworked , sir .
 I don't like anyone in the world , and no one likes me .
 I'm sorry to hear that .
 You might have put your skills to better use .
 Perhaps , MrDarnay .
 Perhaps not .
 Don't let your sober self get too excited .
 You don't know what trouble you might get yourself into .
 Good night .
 MrStryver had been popular at the Old Bailey and at the Sessions lower criminal court Sessions , but he had started to leave his colleagues behind as his ambition drove him forward .
 The Sessions and the Old Bailey now had to summon him to get him to visit .
 MrStryver could be seen every day shoving himself past these old colleagues into the view of the Lord Chief Justice in the Court of King's Bench , like a sunflower shoving past the nearby flowers toward the sun .
 It was once said at the bar that although MrStryver was persuasive , immoral , bold , and well prepared , he was not skilled at getting to the core of complex matters , which is one of the most important skills a lawyer needs .
 He was improving , though .
 The more cases he worked on , the better he became at finding the crux of an argument .
 And no matter how late he stayed up drinking with Sydney Carton , he was always well prepared the next morning .
 Ten o'clock , sir .
 What do you mean .
 Ten o'clock at night .
 Yes , sir .
 You told me to wake you .
 Oh .
 I remember .
 Very well , very well .
 You're a little late , Memory , said Stryver .
 I'm here around the usual time .
 Maybe I'm fifteen minutes late .
 They went into a dirty little room , filled with books and papers , where there was a blazing fire .
 A kettle was steaming on the stove , an in the middle of the mess of papers , there was a table with wine , brandy , rum , sugar , and lemons .
 I see you've already had a bottle of wine , Sydney .
 I thought that he was rather a good-looking man , and I thought I would have been the same kind of man , if I'd had any luck .
 MrStryver laughed until his belly shook .
 You and your luck , Sydney .
 Get to work , get to work .
 Not much work to be done tonight , Memory , said MrStryver happily as he looked at his papers .
 How much .
 Only two sets of them .
 Give me the worst one first .
 Here they are , Sydney .
 Fire away .
 And now that we're finished , Sydney , fill a glass of punch , said MrStryver .
 With a disapproving grunt , MrCarton did what he was told .
 And why not .
 God only knows .
 It was just the way I was , I guess .
 He sat with his hands in his pockets and his legs stretched out in front of him , looking at the fire .
 Don't bother me , answered Sydney , with a somewhat cheerful laugh .
 Don't you moralize .
 Partly by paying me to help you , I suppose .
 But don't bother lecturing me about it .
 You do what you want to do .
 You were always on the front lines , and I was always in back .
 I had to push my way to the front lines .
 I wasn't born there , was I .
 Before Shrewsbury , and at Shrewsbury , and ever since Shrewsbury , continued Carton , you have always been ahead and I have always been behind .
 Even when we were in Paris studying French and French law , and trying to learn other French things that weren't very good for us , you were always going somewhere and I was always going nowhere .
 And whose fault was that .
 Well then .
 Let's talk about that pretty witness , said Stryver , holding his glass .
 Is that a more pleasant topic .
 Apparently it wasn't , for he got depressed again .
 Pretty witness , muttered Carton , staring into his glass .
 I've had enough of witnesses today and tonight .
 Which pretty witness are you talking about .
 Miss Manette , the doctor's beautiful daughter .
 Isn't she .
 No .
 Why , everyone in the courtroom was admiring her .
 Who cares .
 Who made the Old Bailey a judge of beauty .
 She looked like a blond doll .
 Interested to see what happened to her .
 A man can tell if a girl is about to faint right in front of his face .
 I agree to that , but I deny that she's beautiful .
 I'm done drinking .
 I'm going to bed .
 On this particular fine Sunday , MrLorry walked toward Soho early in the afternoon for three reasons .
 First of all , on nice Sundays he often went out for a walk with the doctor and Lucie before lunch .
 Secondly , on Sundays when the weather was bad , he often spent the day with them as a family friend at their house , talking , reading , looking out the window , and generally getting through the day .
 Thirdly , he had his own problems to work out , and the time at the doctor's house was a good time to work them out .
 The handmaid answered that he was expected home soon .
 Is Miss Lucie home .
 The handmaid answered that she too was expected home soon .
 Is Miss Pross home .
 The handmade answered that she might be at home but that she couldn't say for sure .
 Since I feel at home here myself , I'll go upstairs , said MrLorry .
 It's strange that he keeps that reminder of his suffering near him , said MrLorry , looking around .
 And why is that strange .
 was the unexpected question that made him jump .
 I should have thought MrLorry began .
 I am pretty well , thank you , answered MrLorry meekly .
 How are you .
 Nothing to brag about , said Miss Pross .
 Indeed .
 Ah .
 Indeed .
 said Miss Pross .
 I am very unhappy about Miss Manette .
 Indeed .
 Really , then .
 said MrLorry , changing his phrase .
 Really' is bad , but it's better than ëindeed .
 Yes , I am very unhappy .
 May I ask why .
 I don't want dozens of people who are unworthy of Miss Manette coming here to looking for her , said Miss Pross .
 Do dozens of people come here for that .
 Hundreds , said Miss Pross .
 Miss Pross had the habit , like many other people before and after her , to exaggerate her point after someone questioned it .
 I have lived with heror rather , she has lived with mesince she was ten years old and paid me for it .
 She certainly shouldn't have if I could have afforded to take care of her or myself for nothing .
 It's been very hard , said Miss Pross .
 MrLorry didn't understand what exactly was very hard , so he shook his head .
 He used this gesture of shaking his head as a kind of magical cloak , which would fit any occasion the way a magical cloak would fit anyone .
 All sorts of people who are not worthy of her keep showing up , said Miss Pross .
 When you started it .
 When I started it , Miss Pross .
 Didn't you .
 Who brought her father back to life .
 Oh .
 If that's what you mean by starting it said MrLorry .
 There has only ever been one man worthy of Miss Manette , said Miss Pross .
 That was my brother , Solomon , if he hadn't made a mistake in life .
 Never .
 And yet he keeps his bench and tools near him .
 Do you believe he thinks of it often .
 I do , said Miss Pross .
 Do you imagine MrLorry started , but Miss Pross cut him off with : 
 Never imagine anything .
 It's better to have no imagination at all .
 I stand corrected .
 Do you supposeyou do suppose still , don't you .
 Now and then , said Miss Pross .
 I don't suppose anything but what Miss Manette tells me .
 And that is .
 She thinks that he does .
 Dull .
 asked Miss Pross calmly .
 Well .
 As well as I understand it , which is not well at all , he is afraid of the whole topic , said Miss Pross .
 Afraid .
 I think it's clear enough why he would be .
 It's a dreadful thing to remember .
 Besides that , he lost part of himself in prison .
 Not knowing how he lost himself , or how he eventually found himself again , he might never feel certain that he won't lose himself again .
 That alone would make it an unpleasant subject , I would think .
 The street corner , as was mentioned earlier , was a good place for echoes .
 MrLorry could now hear the echo of footsteps coming toward them as if the mention of pacing up and down had started it .
 They're here .
 said Miss Pross , getting up from her chair .
 And soon there will be hundreds of people here to visit Miss Manette .
 On Sundays , Miss Pross ate at the same table as the doctor , but on other days she insisted on eating at unknown times , either downstairs or in her own room on the second floor .
 Her room was a blue room that no one was allowed to enter except for Lucie .
 On this occasion , Miss Pross went out of her way to make a good meal to please the beautiful Lucie , so the food was very good .
 It was a hot day , and after lunch Lucie suggested that they take their wine out under the plane tree , where they could sit in the fresh air .
 As everyone always did what Lucie wanted , they all went out under the plane tree .
 Lucie carried the wine down for MrLorry .
 She had taken on the role of MrLorry's cup bearer , and while they sat under the plane tree talking , she made sure his glass was always full .
 They could see the backs of other houses from where they sat talking , and the wind blew gently through the leaves of the plane tree above their heads .
 Hundreds of people still did not arrive .
 MrDarnay came by while they were sitting under the plane tree , but he was the only one .
 I have been there , as you know , said Darnay , smiling , though his face turned a bit red with anger , in a different way , and not in a way that allows someone to see much of it .
 They told me something interesting when I was there .
 What was that .
 asked Lucie .
 At teatime , while Miss Pross made tea , she had another twitching fit like she had before , and hundreds of people had still not arrived to visit Miss Manette .
 MrCarton had arrived , but he was only the second person to come by .
 The storm is on its way , said Carton .
 People were running through the streets trying to get inside before the storm broke .
 The street corner was filled with the echoes of footsteps coming and going , even though no one could actually be seen walking there .
 It sounds like so many people , and yet no one is there .
 said Darnay after they had listened for a while .
 Isn't it impressive , MrDarnay .
 asked Lucie .
 Some nights I have sat here until I have imaginedbut even something silly I have imagined makes me shudder tonight , when everything is so dark and serious .
 Let us shudder too .
 Tell us what it is .
 It will seem like nothing to you .
 Such ideas are only interesting as we make them up , I think .
 They shouldn't be told to others .
 I have sometimes sat here alone at night , listening until I have imagined that all of the echoes are the echoes of the footsteps of the people that will soon be coming into our lives .
 A lot of people will be coming into our lives if that's the case , added Sydney Carton in his moody way .
 The footsteps never stopped .
 They sped up more and more , and the corner echoed and re-echoed with their sound .
 Some seemed to be under the windows , and some seemed to be in the room .
 Some were coming and some were going .
 Some of them were breaking off and some stopped altogether .
 All were in the streets in the distance , and no one was in sight .
 I'll accept them into my life .
 said Carton .
 I ask no questions and have no conditions .
 There are a lot of people coming toward us , Miss Manetteand I can see them by the lightning .
 He added the last words just after a bright flash of lightning , which illuminated him as he lounged in the window .
 And I hear them .
 he added , after a roar of thunder .
 Here they come , fast , fierce , and furious .
 He was talking about the rush and roar of rain , and he stopped talking because he couldn't be heard over the rain .
 A terrific storm of thunder and lightning broke , and the thunder , lightning , and rain did not stop even for an instant until after the moon rose at midnight .
 Good night , MrCarton , said MrLorry .
 Good night , MrDarnay .
 Do you think we'll ever see such a night together again .
 They might .
 They might also see a great roaring crowd of people come rushing at them , too .
 The monseigneur had one truly noble idea about public business in general : to let everything continue on its own .
 For specific kinds of public business he had another respectable idea : that it should benefit him personally and give him more power or money .
 He believed that the world had been created to bring him pleasure .
 The text of his class , which had only been changed by one pronoun , read , The earth and its fullness are mine , says the monseigneur .
 The tax collector was an extravagant man .
 He had thirty horses in his stables , twenty-four manservants in his house , and six maids served his wife .
 Though his in-laws looked down on him , the tax collector was the most honest of the people at the monseigneur's hotel that day as he didn't hide the fact that all he did was steal and take what he could .
 Elegant , well-bred gentlemen , who , then just as now , have been known by their lack of interest in any interesting subject , were in a fine state of exhaustion at the monseigneur's .
 The spies in the upper-class world of Paris would have had trouble finding one wife in the homes of these men who would admit that she was a mother .
 Indeed , except for the act of giving birth , which doesn't give someone the right to be called a mother , babies were out of fashion .
 Peasant women took care of the babies and brought them up , while sixty-year-old grandmothers acted like twenty-year-olds .
 Monseigneur had taken his chocolate from his four servants and eaten it , and he opened the doors of his inner chamber and came out .
 When he did , everyone started bowing , scraping , fawning , and generally humiliating themselves before him .
 Everyone did so much bowing and praying for the monseigneur that nothing was left for Heaven , which might have been one of several reason why the monseigneur's worshippers never went there .
 With that he shook the snuff off his fingers as if he had shaken dust off his feet and walked quietly downstairs .
 The man went downstairs into the courtyard , got into his carriage , and drove away .
 Not many people had talked to him at the party .
 He had kept a little apart from the rest , and the monseigneur hadn't been particularly friendly to him .
 As a result , he seemed to enjoy seeing the common people running out of the way of his horses , often barely avoiding being run down .
 His driver drove as if he were charging at an enemy , and this recklessness didn't change the master's facial expression at all .
 Complaints had sometimes been heardeven in Paris back then , when no one usually cared about such thingsthat the upper-class custom of driving hard in the narrow streets without sidewalks endangered and maimed the poor in a barbarous manner .
 But few people cared enough to think twice about it , and as in every other matter , the poor were left to get out of trouble on their own .
 Why is he howling like that .
 Is it his child .
 The fountain was a little set off from the street , for the street opened into a space of about ten or twelve square yards .
 The tall man suddenly got up from the ground and ran toward the carriage .
 Monsieur the marquis reached for the handle of his sword .
 He's been killed .
 screamed the man , extending both arms over his head desperately .
 He's dead .
 The marquis took out his purse .
 I'm amazed that you people can't take care of yourselves and your children .
 One or another of you is always getting in the way .
 Who knows how badly you've hurt my horses .
 Here .
 Give him that .
 He tossed a gold coin on the ground for the driver to pick up , and everyone leaned forward to watch it as it fell .
 The tall man cried out again desperately , He's dead .
 Another man , for whom everyone else made way , arrived quickly and stopped him .
 On seeing this late comer , the meek man fell onto his shoulder , sobbing and crying and pointing to the fountain where some women were bent over the motionless bundle .
 They moved around it gently , completely silent , as were the men .
 I know , I know , said the man who had just arrived .
 Be brave , Gaspard .
 It is better for the poor child to die this way than to live .
 It has died in an instant without suffering .
 Could it have lived one hour as happily .
 You are a philosopher , said the marquis , smiling .
 What is your name .
 My name is Defarge .
 What is your job .
 I sell wine , monsieur the marquis .
 Pick that up , you philosopher and seller of wine , said the marquis , throwing down another gold coin .
 Spend it however you like .
 Are the horses all right .
 Stop .
 said monsieur the marquis .
 Stop the horses .
 Who threw that .
 The people were so used to being subservient , and had so much bad experience that they knew what a man like the marquis could do to them , legally or otherwise , that no one said or did anything .
 None of the men even raised an eye .
 Only the woman who stood there knitting looked up steadily , and looked the marquis in the face .
 He was too dignified to even notice .
 His hate-filled eyes passed over her , and over the whole crowd of vermin .
 He leaned back in his seat again and yelled to the driver , Go on .
 Monsieur the marquis rode in his traveling carriage , which was loaded with unnecessary things .
 The carriage was conducted by four horses and two guards on horseback , all struggling up a steep hill .
 The marquis's face was blushing red , but not because he wasn't of good breeding .
 The redness didn't come from within but from an external source beyond his control : the sunset .
 The light from the sunset shone so strongly into the traveling carriage when it reached the top of the hill that the marquis was covered in a crimson light .
 The light will die out soon , said the marquis as he glanced at his hands .
 Bring that man over to me .
 said the marquis to the messenger .
 Did I pass you on the road .
 Yes , Monseigneur .
 I had the honor of seeing you on the road .
 It's true , Monseigneur .
 What were you looking at so intently .
 Monseigneur , I was looking at the man .
 He bent down a little , and with his tattered blue cap he pointed under the carriage .
 Everyone around him bent over to look under the carriage .
 What man , you pig .
 Why were you looking there .
 Who .
 asked the monseigneur .
 The man , Monseigneur .
 Curse these idiots .
 What was the man's name .
 You know all the men in this part of the country .
 Who was he .
 Have mercy on me , Monseigneur .
 He was not from this part of the country .
 I'd never seen him before in my life .
 He was hanging onto the chain .
 Was he trying to suffocate himself .
 What was the man like .
 Really , you did well to see a thief traveling under my carriage and not say anything , said the marquis sarcastically , aware that he shouldn't let poor people bother him .
 Bah .
 Hold him , Monsieur Gabelle .
 Bah .
 Go aside .
 said Monsieur Gabelle .
 I am happy to be of service , Monseigneur .
 Did he run away , fellow .
 Where did that accursed man go .
 Did the man run away , you dolt , when we stopped to apply the brake .
 Monseigneur , he jumped over the side of the hill , headfirst , the way a person jumps into a river .
 Look into it , Gabelle .
 Then he yelled to the driver , Let's go .
 The six or so people who had been looking at the chain were still near the wheels .
 The wheels turned so quickly that they were lucky to get out of the way and to save their skin and bones .
 They were all very skinny , and there wasn't much else left of them , otherwise they might not have been so lucky .
 A woman was kneeling at the foot of this figure .
 She turned her head as the carriage came near her and quickly got up and went to stand at the carriage door .
 It's you , Monseigneur .
 I have a petition for you .
 What .
 What is it .
 Always petitions .
 What about your husband the forester .
 It's always the same with you people .
 He can't afford to pay for something .
 He has paid all that he has , Monseigneur .
 He is dead .
 Good .
 He's quiet .
 Can I bring him back to life for you .
 Sadly , no , Monseigneur .
 But he is buried over there under a sad little heap of grass .
 Again , so .
 She looked like an old woman , but she was in fact young .
 She wrung her vein-covered , rough hands together with wild energy and placed one of them on the door of the carriage .
 She did it tenderly as if placing her hand on someone's chest , as if the carriage could feel her touch .
 Listen to me , Monseigneur .
 Listen to my petition .
 My husband died of hunger .
 So many people do .
 So many more people will die from hunger .
 Again , so .
 Can I feed them all .
 By then the marquis was at his large , high-roofed house , which was surrounded by trees .
 A torch was lit , and his carriage stopped and a large door of his chateau was opened for him .
 Not yet , Monseigneur , the servant replied .
 He probably won't arrive tonight .
 But leave the table as it is anyway .
 I will be ready for dinner in fifteen minutes .
 What is that .
 he asked calmly , looking at the horizontal lines of black on the stone floor .
 Outside the blinds .
 Open the blinds .
 The servant opened the blinds .
 It's nothing , Monseigneur .
 There's nothing outside but the trees and the darkness .
 Good , said the marquis calmly .
 Close the blinds again .
 The servant closed the blinds and the marquis went back to eating his supper .
 He had finished half of it when he stopped eating again with his glass of wine in his hands .
 He had heard the sound of wheels , and the sound grew closer and quickly came up to the front of the house .
 Find out who has arrived .
 It was the monseigneur's nephew .
 He had been a few leagues a league is about three miles leagues behind the monseigneur early in the afternoon .
 He had been catching up to him quickly , but not quickly enough to arrive with him at the house .
 At the posting house he had been told that the monseigneur was ahead of him .
 The servants told the nephew that supper was waiting for him and that the monseigneur wanted him to join him .
 He came to supper shortly after he arrived .
 In England , the monseigneur's nephew was known as Charles Darnay .
 The monseigneur was polite when he arrived , but they did not shake hands .
 You left Paris yesterday , sir .
 he asked the monseigneur as he sat down at the table .
 Yes , yesterday .
 And you .
 I came here directly .
 From London .
 It took you a long time to get here , said the marquis , smiling .
 No .
 I came directly .
 Excuse me .
 I didn't mean a long time in your journey .
 I meant a long time intending to come here .
 I have been delayed by the nephew paused various business .
 Without a doubt , said the marquis calmly .
 As you guess , I have come back , sir , looking for the object that took me away in the first place .
 It put me in great and unexpected danger .
 But it is a sacred object , and even if it had led to my death , I hope it would have protected me .
 Don't say ëto death , ' said the uncle .
 It's not necessary to say to death .
 I doubt , sir , that if it had carried me to the very brink of death , you would have stopped me there , answered the nephew .
 The expression on the marquis's face , and the dents in his nose , ominously suggested that was true .
 The uncle made a graceful gesture of protest , but it was so apparent that he was only being polite that it wasn't very reassuring .
 Indeed , sir , as far as I know , you may have arranged to make my already suspicious circumstances look even more suspicious .
 No , no , no , said the uncle , pleasantly .
 But whether that's true or not , continued the nephew , looking at him suspiciously , I know that you would stop me any way you could , and use any means necessary .
 I remember that .
 Thank you , said the marquis , very sweetly .
 The tone of his voice stayed in the air like the tone of a musical instrument .
 I don't quite understand , answered the uncle , sipping his coffee .
 Can you explain .
 I believe that if you weren't out of favor with the court , and had not been for years , that a letter de cachet official documents that could be used to send someone to prison letter de cachet would have put me in prison indefinitely .
 I see that , luckily for me , you were received coldly two days ago at the monseigneur's reception , as usual , said the nephew .
 The marquis inhaled a pinch of snuff powdered tobacco that is sniffed up the nostrils snuff and shook his head .
 He was as elegantly unhappy as he could be with a country where he and his family still lived .
 We have used the power of our family's position , both in the old days and today , to such a degree , said Darnay unhappily , that I think our name is more hated that any name in France .
 Let's hope so , said the uncle .
 Hatred of the upper classes is the involuntary respect of the low classes .
 The only philosophy left is oppression .
 The dark respect of fear and slavery , my friend , will keep the peasants in line as long as this roof blocks out the sky , he said , looking up at the ceiling .
 That might not be as long as the marquis thought .
 If someone had shown him a picture of his chateau a few years later , and a picture of fifty others like it , he might not have been able to tell his house from the other burned , destroyed wrecks .
 As far as the roof , he might have discovered it blocking out the sky in a new awayshutting it out from the sight of the people who were shot by the bullets of a hundred thousand muskets .
 Meanwhile , said the marquis , I will preserve the honor and faith of our family , if you won't .
 But you must be tired .
 Should we end our meeting for the night .
 One more minute .
 We can continue for another hour if you want .
 Sir , said the nephew , we have done wrong , and we are reaping the benefits of these wrongdoings .
 We have done wrong .
 the marquis repeated with a questioning smile , delicately pointing at his nephew and then to himself .
 Death has separated us .
 said the marquis .
 My friend , I will die preserving the system under which I have lived .
 When he said it , he inhaled a pinch of snuff and put the snuffbox in his pocket .
 Better to be a rational creature , he added after ringing a small bell on the table , and accept your natural destiny .
 But I can see that you are lost , Monsieur Charles .
 Our family's property and all of this country are lost to me , said the nephew , sadly .
 I am giving them up .
 I have no plan to claim it yet .
 If I inherited it from you tomorrow .
 Which I hope , for my sake , is not likely , the marquis said .
 Or twenty years from now .
 You're too kind , said the marquis .
 Still , I prefer the possibility that I may live that long .
 I would give it up and go live a different kind of life somewhere else .
 It isn't much to give up .
 It only brings me misery .
 Hah .
 said the marquis , looking around his finely decorated room .
 Hah .
 said the marquis again , in a well-satisfied manner .
 In England , perhaps .
 Yes .
 I will not tarnish the family name there .
 The family name can't harm me elsewhere , since I do not use it in other countries .
 When the marquis had rung the bell , his valet lit the bedroom next door .
 Bright light now shone from it through the doorway .
 The marquis looked that way and listened until he had heard his valet walk away .
 I have told you already that I may be indebted to you , sir , for my success there .
 Otherwise , it has been a safe haven for me .
 Those bragging English say that it is a safe haven for many people .
 Do you know another Frenchman who has also found safety there .
 A doctor .
 With a daughter .
 Yes , said the marquis .
 You are tired .
 Good night .
 Yes , repeated the marquis .
 A doctor with a daughter .
 Yes .
 So begins the new way of thinking .
 You are tired .
 Good night .
 It would have been as useful to question the stone faces outside the chateau as it was to question the marquis's face .
 The nephew looked at him as he passed him on his way out the door , but he couldn't tell what he was thinking .
 I am cooler now and am ready to go to bed , said the marquis .
 For three hours , the stone faces of men and lions on the chateau stared out at the night .
 All of the land was dark , and the dust settled on the quiet roads .
 It was so dark that the little heaps of poor grass in the graveyard were indistinguishable from one another , and the figure on the crucifix might have come down , since it was practically invisible in the darkness .
 In the village , the tax collectors and the people who paid the taxes were fast asleep .
 They may have been dreaming of large feasts , as starving people usually do , or of resting and living easily , as overworked slaves and oxen do .
 The thin villagers slept soundly and , in their dreams , were fed well and were free .
 The Gorgon had looked at the building again that night and had turned one more face to stone .
 The building had been waiting for this particular stone face for two hundred years .
 Drive him quickly to his tomb .
 From Jacques .
 He hadn't expected things to be easy for him in London .
 If he had , he wouldn't have done so well .
 He had expected hard work , and he found it .
 He did the work and made the best of it , and by doing this , his success continued .
 Charles Darnay .
 I'm happy to see you .
 We have been expecting you for three or four days .
 MrStryver and Sydney Carton were both here yesterday and both said you should have visited by now .
 I am thankful to them for their interest in me , he answered , a little indifferent about them but very kind to the doctor .
 Miss Manette .
 said the doctor , controlling himself .
 Bring your chair over here and tell me what it is .
 MrDarnay brought over the chair as he had been told , but he had trouble saying what he wanted to say .
 The doctor reached out his hand to stop him .
 After he had kept it there a little while , he drew back his hand and asked : 
 Is Lucie what you want to talk about .
 She is .
 It is hard for me to talk about her at any time .
 It is especially hard for me to hear you talk about her in that tone , Charles Darnay .
 I believe you .
 I trust you .
 I believe you .
 He was so restrained and so unwilling to talk about the subject that Charles Darnay hesitated .
 Shall I continue , sir .
 The doctor was silent again .
 Don't speak of that , sir .
 Leave that alone .
 I beg you , don't bring that up .
 I'm sorry , said the doctor quietly after a while .
 I don't doubt that you love Lucie .
 You should be happy about that .
 Have you spoken to Lucie about this .
 Or written to her about it .
 Never .
 It would be rude to pretend not to know that you have kept yourself away from her out of respect for me .
 I thank you .
 I believe you , her father answered sadly .
 I have thought so before now .
 I believe you .
 He placed his hand on the doctor's hand as he spoke .
 No , dear Dr .
 Manette .
 Like you , I left France by choice .
 Like you , I left to get away from the distractions , oppressions , and unhappiness .
 Like you , I worked to get away and live by my own hard work .
 I left in search of a better future , and I only want to share in your happiness , to share your life and home , and devote myself to you until death .
 I don't want to take Lucie away from you as your child and friend , but to tie her closer to you , if such a thing is possible .
 He was still holding her father's hand .
 Her father responded by placing his hands on the arms of his chair .
 He looked up at him for the first time since their conversation had started , and it was obvious that he was struggling with something .
 He struggled with that dark look that would on occasion appear on his face .
 So far , none .
 Are you hoping to find this out from this conversation .
 Not at all .
 I might not have the courage to do it for weeks .
 I might have the courage to do it tomorrow , whether it's the right time to do it or not .
 Are you looking for advice from me .
 Are you hoping for a promise from me .
 Yes , I am .
 What is it .
 I know that without you I have no hope .
 I understand that , even if Miss Manette loved me alreadydon't assume that I am conceited enough to think that she doesI could ever be loved by her if you didn't approve .
 If that is so , do you see what else is involved in it .
 I'm sure of it .
 Charles Darnay , people who are close to each other still have secrets , just as people who are far apart .
 In the first case , those secrets are subtle , delicate , and hard to penetrate .
 In this way , Lucie is a mystery to me .
 I don't know how she feels about you .
 May I ask you , sir , if you think she is as he hesitated , the doctor finished the thought for him .
 Is being courted by another man .
 That is what I meant .
 Her father thought awhile before he answered : 
 You have seen MrCarton here .
 MrStryver is here too , sometimes .
 If she is being courted , it would have to be by one of these two men .
 Or both of them , said Darnay .
 I hadn't thought of that .
 I think it's more likely that it's neither of them .
 You want me to promise you something .
 Tell me what .
 I make the promise without any condition , said the doctor .
 I believe that what you said is true .
 I believe your intention is to make the bond between my daughter and me stronger , not weaker .
 If she ever tells me that she loves you , I will give her to you .
 If there wereCharles Darnay , if there were .
 MrDarnay had taken his hand gratefully .
 They were holding hands when the doctor said : 
 any ideas , reasons , fears , anything at all , new or old against the man that she was in love withany wrongdoing that he was not directly responsible forI would forget them all for the sake of her happiness .
 She is everything to me .
 More to me than suffering , more to me than injusticeÖWell .
 This is pointless talk .
 Your confidence in me should be returned with confidence in you .
 You may remember that the name I go by now , although it is only slightly changed from my mother's , is not my own .
 I want to tell you what my name really is and why I am in England .
 said the doctor from Beauvais .
 Stop .
 Tell me when I ask you , not now .
 If you are successful and Lucie loves you , tell me the morning you get married .
 Do you promise .
 Of course .
 It was dark when Charles Darnay left , and it was darker an hour later when Lucie came home .
 She hurried into the room alone since Miss Pross had gone straight upstairs and was surprised to find the reading chair empty .
 Father .
 she called to him .
 Father dear .
 She got out of bed and went to watch him sleep that night .
 He slept heavily , and his tray of shoemaking tools and his unfinished shoes were all laid out the way they always were .
 Sydney Carton had been working twice as hard that night , and the night before .
 He had been working hard for many nights in a row , clearing out a lot of MrStryver's papers before going on a long vacation .
 The papers had finally been cleared out , and MrStryver's debts had been paid up .
 Everything was finished until November , when the weather would turn foggy , and legal matters would become complex and foggy too , and there would be work for him again .
 I am .
 Do you .
 Yes .
 And I'm not even marrying for money .
 What do you say to that .
 I don't have much to say .
 Who is she .
 Guess .
 Do I know her .
 Guess .
 And you , returned Sydney sarcastically , who was busy mixing the punch , are such a sensitive and poetic spirit .
 You're luckier , you mean .
 That's not what I mean .
 I mean I am a man of moremore .
 Say chivalry' while you're at it , suggested Carton .
 Go on , said Sydney Carton .
 It is good for a lawyer to be ashamed about something , answered Sydney .
 You should thank me .
 Sydney drank a large glass of the punch he had made and laughed .
 I've never seen you do it yet , Carton muttered to himself .
 I do it because it's smart to do it .
 I do it on principle .
 And look at me .
 I do well for myself .
 You aren't doing well with your story about your plans to marry , answered Carton casually .
 I wish you would stay on the subject .
 And back to medon't you understand that I am hopeless .
 He looked angry when he asked the question .
 You have no business being hopeless , answered Stryver harshly .
 I have no business being anything as far as I know , said Sydney Carton .
 Who is the lady .
 I did .
 You did .
 Right here in this apartment .
 Sydney Carton looked at his punch , and he looked at his satisfied friend .
 He drank his punch and looked at his friend again .
 Carton , still drinking his punch , answered Why should I be surprised .
 Do you approve .
 I'll think about it , said Sydney .
 Accordingly , MrStryver decided to begin his long vacation with a formal offer to take Miss Manette to Vauxhall Gardens .
 If that didn't work , he would take her to Ranelagh .
 If that failed too , he would go to her house in Soho and tell her how he felt about her there .
 Hello .
 said MrStryver .
 How do you do .
 I hope you are well .
 MrStryver's oddest characteristic was that he always appeared too big for whatever space he was in .
 He seemed so large in Tellson's that old clerks in far corners looked up in protest as though he were squeezing them against the wall .
 The head of the bank , reading a paper far away , lowered it unhappily , as if MrStryver had head-butted him in the stomach .
 Can I do anything for you , MrStryver .
 asked MrLorry in a professional way .
 Why , no , thank you .
 This is a personal visit , MrLorry .
 I have come to have a word with you in private .
 Oh dear me .
 yelled MrLorry , rubbing his chin and looking at MrStryver doubtfully .
 Oh , dear me , ' sir .
 repeated Stryver , pulling away .
 Oh , dear you , sir .
 What do you mean , MrLorry .
 MrLorry adjusted his little wig at his ears and bit the feather tip of his quill pen .
 Aren't I successful .
 asked Stryver .
 And aren't I becoming more successful .
 If the question is if you're becoming more successful , then no one can doubt that , said MrLorry , who was thrilled to be able to agree with him .
 Then what on earth do you mean , MrLorry .
 asked MrStryver , visibly hurt .
 Well .
 Iwere you on your way to Miss Manette's house right now .
 asked MrLorry .
 I'm going straight there .
 said Stryver , with a thump of his fat fist on the desk .
 I think I wouldn't do that if I were you .
 Because I wouldn't do such a thing unless I had some reason to think that I would succeed , said MrLorry .
 MrLorry looked at the head banker in the corner and looked back at MrStryver , who was now angry .
 Then what you're telling me , MrLorry , said Stryver turning toward him , is that you think Miss Manette is an idiot .
 Not exactly .
 What I mean , MrStryver , said MrLorry , who was turning red in the face , is that I will not let anyone speak badly of Miss Manette .
 If I knew any manand I hope I do notwho had such poor taste and such a bad temper that he couldn't keep himself from speaking badly of Miss Manette here at my desk , even the fact that we are in Tellson's Bank wouldn't stop me from telling him off .
 The fact that MrStryver was so angry but had to keep his voice down made his veins stand out .
 MrLorry's veins , as calm as they usually were , were just as bad now that it was his turn to speak .
 That is what I'm trying to tell you , sir , said MrLorry .
 Let's be clear about that .
 MrStryver sucked on the end of a ruler for a little while , then stood tapping the ruler against his teeth , which probably gave him a toothache .
 He broke the awkward silence by saying : 
 Are you asking me for advice , MrStryver .
 Yes , I am .
 Very good .
 Then I have given you my advice and you have repeated it correctly .
 All I can say to that , laughed Stryver , who was clearly annoyed , is that thisha , ha .
 This beats everything .
 Not I .
 said Stryver , whistling .
 I can't seem to find third parties with common sense .
 I can only find it in myself .
 I believe I have sense in certain matters .
 You believe nonsense .
 It's new to me , but I think you might be right .
 How long would I have to stay in town .
 Oh .
 Only a few hours .
 I could go to the Manette's house in Soho tonight and come to your apartment afterward .
 MrStryver was smart enough to realize that the banker wouldn't have said so much about his opinion unless he were sure of it .
 As unprepared as he was to receive MrLorry's unwanted advice , he followed it .
 And now , said MrStryver , pointing his finger and shaking it at all of Temple Bar , my way out of this is to prove you're all wrong .
 He soothed himself with a trick used by lawyers at the Old Bailey .
 You won't prove me wrong , Miss Manette , said MrStryver .
 I'll prove myself wrong .
 Well .
 said MrLorry pleasantly , after spending half an hour trying unsuccessfully to get MrStryver to bring up the subject .
 I have been to Soho .
 To Soho .
 repeated MrStryver indifferently .
 Oh , yes , of course .
 What was I thinking .
 And I'm sure , said Mrlorry , that I was right when we talked this morning .
 My opinion has been confirmed , and I repeat the same advice to you .
 I'm sorry for your sake and sorry for her father's sake , said MrStryver in his friendliest way .
 I know this must be a difficult subject for the family .
 Let's not talk about it again .
 I don't understand you , said MrLorry .
 Apparently not , he answered , nodding his head .
 It doesn't matter .
 But it does matter , MrLorry said .
 MrLorry was so surprised that he stared blankly at MrStryver as MrStryver shoved him toward the front door and pretended to be in a good mood .
 Make the best of it , my dear sir , said Stryver .
 Let's talk no more about it .
 Thanks again for allowing me to talk to get your opinion .
 Good night .
 If Sydney Carton ever made a good impression anywhere , it was certainly never at Dr .
 Manette's house .
 He had been going there regularly for a whole year , and he always spent his time there lying around in a grumpy mood .
 When he said anything , he spoke well , but his apathy cast a shadow over him , and his good heart rarely shined through .
 The servant brought him upstairs and he found Lucie working there alone .
 She had never been comfortable when he was around , and she was a little embarrassed when he arrived and sat down near her at her table .
 She looked at his face after they exchanged a few pleasantries and noticed that something was different about him .
 You look sick , MrCarton .
 No .
 But I live an unhealthy lifestyle , Miss Manette .
 What can you expect from someone as decadent as I am .
 God knows it's a shame that I don't .
 Then why not change the way you live .
 She looked at him gently again , surprised and sad to see that he was crying .
 His voice sounded sad , too , as he answered : 
 It's too late for that .
 I will never be better than I am now .
 I'll only get worse and worse .
 He leaned his elbow on the table and covered his eyes with his hand .
 The table trembled as he cried on it silently .
 She had never seen him so vulnerable , and it was upsetting to her .
 He could tell that she was upset , so without looking at her , he said : 
 Please forgive me , Miss Manette .
 I'm crying because of what I'm about to say to you .
 Will you listen to me .
 If it will make you happy , MrCarton , I would be glad to .
 God bless you for being so kind .
 After a little while he removed his hand from his face , and he spoke steadily .
 Don't be afraid to listen to me .
 Don't pull away from what I say .
 I am like someone who has died young .
 My whole life is a missed opportunity .
 No , MrCarton .
 I bet the best is still to come .
 I'm sure that you might make yourself proud .
 She was pale and shaking , and he tried to soothe her .
 He was filled with a misery and self-loathing that made the conversation unlike any other .
 Can't I help you , even though I don't love you , MrCarton .
 Forgive me , but can't I help you put your life on a better path .
 Can't I repay your trust in me .
 I know you are putting trust in me by telling me this , she said modestly after hesitating a bit , with genuine tears .
 I know that you wouldn't tell anyone else this .
 Can't I turn this into something that will help you , MrCarton .
 He shook his head .
 Nothing will come of it .
 Oh , MrCarton , think about it again .
 Try to start over .
 Since I have caused you to be more unhappy than you were before you knew me , MrCarton .
 Since the condition that you have described is partly my faultthat's what you mean , if I can say it plainlycan't I be of service to you .
 Am I not able to help you at all .
 I beg you again and again to believe that you are able to do better things with your life , MrCarton .
 Don't beg me to believe it anymore , Miss Manette .
 I know what I am .
 I'm upsetting you , so I will finish what I have to say .
 Will you let me believe , when I remember this day , that I told you the last secret of my life and that you kept it .
 And that no one will ever know about it .
 If that will bring you comfort , yes .
 Not even the person you love the most .
 MrCarton , she answered after pausing nervously , it's your secret , not mine .
 I promise to respect that and to tell no one .
 Thank you .
 And again , God bless you .
 He kissed her hand and walked toward the door .
 I will , MrCarton .
 Hooray , Father .
 cried Young Jerry .
 The boy yelled his cheer with mysterious significance .
 His father was so upset by his cheer that he waited until no one was looking and then smacked the boy on the ear .
 What do you mean .
 What are you hooraying at .
 What are you trying to tell your father , you young punk .
 This boy is too much for me .
 said MrCruncher , looking at his son .
 Him and his hoorays .
 Don't let me hear any more out of you or I'll hit you again .
 Do you hear me .
 I wasn't doing anything wrong , protested Young Jerry , rubbing his cheek .
 Stop it then , said MrCruncher .
 I don't want to hear you say you did nothing wrong .
 Get up on that stool and look at the crowd .
 What's happening , my friend .
 What's it all about .
 I don't know , said the man .
 The man went back to yelling at the coach , Spies .
 Yaha .
 Tst .
 Spies .
 He asked another man .
 Who is it .
 Was he a spy .
 asked MrCruncher .
 He was an Old Bailey spy , answered the man .
 He went on yelling at the coach , Yaha .
 Tst .
 Yah .
 Old Bailey spiiies .
 Why , of course .
 said Jerry , remembering the trial he had helped with .
 I've seen him .
 Is he dead .
 Thus the procession continued down the street , with the crowd drinking beer , smoking pipes , singing songs , and some people doing mocking impressions of people in mourning .
 More and more people joined the mob as it went , and all the shops closed as it approached .
 It was heading for the old church of Saint Pancras , far off in the country .
 Eventually it arrived there , and the crowd insisted on all going into the burial ground .
 There they finally buried the dead Roger Cly as they wanted , and to their great satisfaction .
 MrCruncher didn't take part in the final events , but had stayed at the churchyard to talk with the undertakers .
 The churchyard was calming to him .
 He got a pipe from a nearby pub and smoked it as he looked at the fences and thoughtfully considered the graveyard .
 Young Jerry had covered for his father in his absence and told him that there had been no work while he was gone .
 The bank closed , the old clerks came out , the watchmen took their place , and MrCruncher and his son went home to tea .
 The unhappy MrsCruncher shook her head .
 Why , you're doing it in front of my face .
 said MrCruncher , angry and anxious .
 I'm not saying anything .
 Yes , Jerry , said his wife .
 MrCruncher didn't mean anything particular with these words , but he used them sarcastically , as people often do , to express unhappiness .
 You're going out tonight .
 asked his decent wife after he had taken another bite .
 Yes , I am .
 Can I go with you , Father .
 asked his son quickly .
 No , you can't .
 I'm going fishing , as your mother knows .
 That's where I'm going .
 I'm going fishing .
 Never mind that .
 Are you going to bring any fish home , Father .
 If I don't , you'll have very little food tomorrow , answered his father , shaking his head .
 That's enough questions from you .
 I'm not going out until you've been in bed for a long time .
 And remember .
 said MrCruncher .
 Don't play around tomorrow .
 If I , an honest businessman , am able to put a joint of meat on the table , you won't decide to not eat it and only eat bread .
 And if I , an honest businessman , am able to get a little bit of beer , you won't decide to only drink water .
 When in Rome , do as the Romans do .
 Rome will treat you poorly if you don't .
 I am your Rome , you know .
 Then he began mumbling again : 
 I told you I would , said MrCruncher , and I did .
 Jerry , Jerry , Jerry .
 his wife begged .
 You pray that I'll fail in my business dealings , said Jerry , and then my partners and I suffer .
 You're supposed to honor and obey your husband .
 Why the devil won't you .
 I try to be a good wife , Jerry , the poor woman argued , crying .
 Is it being a good wife to sabotage your husband's business .
 Is it honoring your husband to dishonor his business .
 Is it obeying your husband to disobey him on the important subject of his work .
 You hadn't started this terrible work back when I made those vows , Jerry .
 They argued quietly , until MrCruncher kicked off his clay-covered boots and lied down on the floor .
 After taking a nervous peek at him lying on his back , with his rust-covered hands under his head for a pillow , Young Jerry lay down too and fell asleep again .
 There was no fish for breakfast , or much of anything else .
 MrCruncher was in a bad mood , and he kept an iron pot lid near him in case he saw MrsCruncher saying grace and wanted to throw it at her .
 He brushed his hair and washed up at the usual time and went off to work with his son .
 I thought you knew everything , Father , said Young Jerry pretending unconvincingly .
 What merchandise does he trade in , Father .
 asked the quick Young Jerry .
 His merchandise , said MrCruncher after thinking it over , is of a scientific kind .
 People's bodies , isn't it , Father .
 asked the boy , excited .
 I think it's something like that , said MrCruncher .
 Oh , Father , I want to be a resurrection man when I grow up .
 People had started drinking earlier than usual at Monsieur Defarge's wine shop .
 As early as six o'clock in the morning , sickly faces looking into the shop's barred windows had seen the faces of other people inside , hunched over their wine glasses .
 Monsieur Defarge sold very weak wine even when things were going well , but nowadays his wine was especially weak .
 Moreover , his wine tasted sour and made the people who drank it sour and depressed .
 Monsieur Defarge's wine didn't fire them with a Bacchanalian Bacchus was the Roman god of wine Bacchanalian flame , but instead filled them with a low , intense heat .
 Good day , gentlemen .
 said Monsieur Defarge .
 Saying this may have been a signal to let everyone know they could speak .
 Together everyone answered , Good day .
 The weather is bad , gentlemen , said Defarge , shaking his head .
 When he said this , all the men looked at each other , then they looked at the ground and sat in silence .
 Except for one man , who got up and left .
 Have you finished your meal , my friend .
 asked Monsieur Defarge after a while .
 Yes , thank you .
 Come on , then .
 I'll show you the apartment I said you could stay in .
 It's perfect for you .
 Defarge carefully closed the door and said quietly : 
 Jacques One , Jacques Two , Jacques Three .
 This is the witness that I , Jacques Four , went to meet .
 He will tell you everything .
 Tell them , Jacques Five .
 The repairer of roads wiped his dark brow with his blue cap and said , Where should I begin , monsieur .
 Begin at the beginning , was Monsieur Defarge's sensible reply .
 The repairer of roads acted it all out again .
 He ought to have perfected his act by then , since he had been entertaining his village with it for the whole year .
 Jacques One jumped in and asked if he had ever seen the man before .
 Never , answered the repairer of roads , standing up straight again .
 Jacques Three wanted to know how he was able to recognize him if he had never seen him before .
 You should have said as short as a dwarf , answered Jacques Two .
 He's right there , Jacques , mumbled Defarge to the man who had interrupted .
 Go on .
 The number of months doesn't matter , said Defarge .
 He is well hidden , but unfortunately he's finally been found .
 Go on .
 With the help of his cap , he showed them how the man had his elbows bound to his sides with a rope that was tied behind him .
 He described it as if he were there , and it was obvious that he saw it all clearly .
 Perhaps he hadn't seen much else excitement in his life .
 I didn't let the soldiers see that I recognized the tall man , and he didn't let them see that he recognized me .
 We did all of it with our eyes .
 ëCome on .
 ' said the leader of the group , pointing to the village .
 ëBring him quickly to his grave .
 ' At that , they started walking faster .
 I followed .
 His arms were swollen from being tied up so tightly , and his wooden shoes were large and awkward .
 He was limping , walking slowly because of this , and the soldiers were prodding him forward with their gunslike this .
 He showed them how the man was pushed forward by the butt ends of the muskets .
 As they went down the hill like mad men running a race , the tall man fell .
 The soldiers laughed and picked him up again .
 His face was bleeding and covered with dust , but he couldn't touch it .
 So they laughed at him again .
 They brought him to the village , and all the villagers came running to look at him .
 The soldiers took him past the mill and up to the prison .
 All the villagers watched the prison gate open in the darkness of the night and the tall man go inside .
 It looked like the prison gate swallowed himlike this .
 He opened his mouth wide and then shut it quickly , making a snapping sound with his teeth .
 Seeing that the man didn't want to ruin the effect by opening his mouth again , Defarge said , Go on , Jacques .
 Go on , Jacques , said Defarge .
 Listen then , Jacques , Jacques One interrupted sternly .
 Know that a petition was presented to the king and queen .
 Everyone here , except you , saw the king take it while he was in his carriage in the street , sitting next to the queen .
 It was Defarge , this man here , who , risking his life , ran out in front of the horses with the petition in his hand .
 And listen again , Jacques , said Jacques Three , who was kneeling down .
 He kept running his fingers over his face in a noticeably greedy way , as if hungry for something besides food and drink .
 The guards , on horse and on foot , surrounded Defarge as he presented the petition and beat him .
 Understand .
 I understand , messieurs .
 Go on then , said Defarge .
 I'm thirty-five , said the repairer of roads , who looked sixty .
 It was done when you were over ten years old .
 Maybe you saw it .
 Enough .
 said Defarge impatiently .
 Long live the devil .
 Continue .
 It's terrible , messieurs .
 How can women and children fetch water from the fountain .
 Who can gather and gossip there now that a man has been killed there .
 When I left the village Monday evening , as the sun was setting , I looked back from the hill and the shadow of the man hanging from the gallows fell across the church , the mill , and the prison .
 It seemed to fall across the whole world , messieurs .
 The greedy man chewed on one of his fingers as he looked at the other three , and his finger shook with a hunger for something other than food .
 That's all , messieurs .
 I left at sunset as I had been told to do , and I walked the rest of the night and half of the next day until I met this man here , as I was told .
 I came with him , sometimes riding a horse and sometimes walking , through the rest of yesterday and last night .
 And here I am .
 After a gloomy silence , Jacques One said , Good .
 You have done the right thing and have told your story well .
 Will you wait for us a little while outside .
 Of course , said the repairer of roads .
 Defarge brought him to the top of the stairs , left him sitting there , and came back .
 The three men had gotten up and were standing together when Defarge came back into the attic .
 What do you say , Jacques .
 asked Jacques One .
 Should we put them on the list .
 To be put on the list and destroyed , answered Defarge .
 Wonderful .
 said the greedy man .
 The chateau and the whole family .
 asked Jacques One .
 The chateau and the whole family , answered Defarge .
 Extermination .
 The hungry man said Wonderful .
 again and began chewing another finger .
 He doesn't know anything , said Defarge .
 At least nothing more than what would get him hanged , too .
 I'll take responsibility for him .
 Let him stay with me .
 I'll take care of him and then send him on his way .
 He wants to see the world of the upper classes : the king , the queen , and the court .
 Let him see them on Sunday .
 What .
 shouted the hungry man , staring at him .
 Isn't it a bad sign that he wants to see royalty and nobility .
 Jacques , said Defarge .
 Show a cat just a little bit of milk if you want it to thirst for it .
 Show a dog his natural prey if you want it to hunt it one day .
 Worse places than Defarge's wine shop could easily be found in Paris for an unsophisticated peasant like him .
 Except for a mysterious fear of Madame Defarge that bothered him constantly , his life was new and exciting .
 But Madame Defarge sat at the counter all day , ignoring him and determined not to show that his being had any connection to a secret plan .
 He trembled in his wooden shoes whenever he looked at her and told himself that it was impossible to know what the lady might pretend next .
 He was sure that if she decided to pretend that she had seen him kill someone and then skin the victim afterward , she would continue with the idea until he had been convicted of murder .
 Therefore , when Sunday came , the repairer of roads was not happy , although he claimed he was , to find out that Madame Defarge was to go with Defarge and himself to Versailles .
 It was additionally worrisome to have Madame Defarge knitting the whole way there on public transportation .
 It was also worrisome to have her in the crowd that afternoon still holding her knitting in her hands as the crowd waited to see the carriage of the king and queen .
 You work hard , madame , said the man next to her in the crowd .
 Yes , answered Madame Defarge .
 I have a lot of work to do .
 What do you make , madame .
 Many things .
 Such as shrouds a cloth that a corpse is wrapped in before burial shrouds , answered Madame Defarge calmly .
 The repairer of roads was now regaining his senses .
 He worried that he had done something wrong by behaving the way he had , but he had not .
 You are the man we want , said Defarge in his ear .
 You make these fools think that this will all go on forever .
 That makes them more disrespectful and will end this all that much sooner .
 Hey .
 yelled the repairer of roads , thinking about what he said .
 That's true .
 Madame Defarge looked at him arrogantly and nodded in agreement .
 Honestly , madame , I think so .
 At least for the moment .
 Honestly , madame , yes .
 It's true , madame .
 You've seen both dolls and birds today , said Madame Defarge with a wave of her hand toward where the king and queen and their attendants had been seen .
 Now go home .
 The chateau and the hut , the stone face and the hanged man , the red stain on the stone floor and the pure water in the village well , thousands of acres of land , a whole province of France , even all of France , and everything under the night skyall are just a line as thin as a hair on the timeline of man .
 Our whole world and all the events that take place on it , both big and little , pass in the twinkling of a star .
 And just as human knowledge can split a ray of light and analyze what it's made of , so more intelligent beings might be able to analyze all of the thoughts , deeds , vices , and virtues of every human being on earth .
 Say then , my friend .
 What did Jacques the policeman tell you .
 He told me all he knows , which isn't much tonight .
 There's been another spy hired for our neighborhood .
 There might be many more , for all he knows , but he knows of one for sure .
 Oh , well .
 said Madame Defarge , raising her eyebrows in a calm , businesslike manner .
 We'll need to put him on the list .
 What do they call him .
 He's English .
 Even better .
 What's his name .
 Barsad , said Defarge , using the French pronunciation .
 But he had been so careful to get the name right that he said it perfectly .
 Barsad , repeated Madame Defarge .
 Good .
 What's his first name .
 John .
 My goodness .
 It's a portrait .
 said Madame Defarge , laughing .
 I'll put him on the list tomorrow .
 It was a hot night , and the shop was in a filthy area of town and smelled bad .
 Monsieur Defarge's sense of smell wasn't delicate at all , but the wine stock seemed to smell much stronger than it had ever tasted , as did the rum , brandy , and anise a licorice-flavored liqueur anise .
 He waved the combination of scents away as he finished his pipe and put it down .
 You're tired , said Madame Defarge , looking up as she tied the coins into the handkerchief .
 They are only the usual smells .
 I'm a little tired , her husband admitted .
 You're a little depressed too , said Madame Defarge , who was never so focused on the shop's business that she didn't notice how her husband was doing .
 Oh , men , men .
 But , my dear .
 Defarge began .
 But , my dear .
 ' Madame Defarge repeated , nodding at him .
 But , my dear .
 You are depressed tonight , my dear .
 It doesn't take a long time for a man to be struck by lightning , said Defarge .
 How long , asked Madame Defarge calmly , does it take to make and store the lightning .
 Tell me .
 Defarge looked up thoughtfully , as if there were some sense in what she had said .
 It doesn't take a long time , said Madame Defarge , for an earthquake to destroy a town .
 Well .
 Tell me , how long does it take to create an earthquake .
 A long time , I suppose , said Defarge .
 She tied a coin into a knot with a fierce look in her eyes , as if she were strangling an enemy .
 Well .
 said Defarge , with a shrug .
 We shall not see victory .
 We will have helped to cause it , answered Madame Defarge , waiving her hand for emphasis .
 Nothing that we do is wasted .
 I believe with all of my soul that we shall see victory .
 But even if we don't , even if I knew that we would not , show me the neck of an aristocrat who is a tyrant and I would .
 Then Madame Defarge , clenching her teeth , violently tied another knot in the handkerchief .
 Yes .
 But it is your weakness that sometimes you need to see your victim and an opportunity in front of you to keep you going .
 You need to stay focused without that .
 When the time comes , let yourself go like a tiger and a devil .
 But until then , keep yourself in checkalways ready to pounce , but hidden where no one can see .
 A person coming in through the door of the wine shop cast his shadow on Madame Defarge , and Madame Defarge felt it was someone she didn't know .
 She put down her knitting and started to pin her rose to her hat before she looked at the stranger .
 It was strange .
 The moment Madame Defarge picked up the rose , all of the customers stopped talking and gradually left the wine shop .
 Good day , madame , said the newcomer .
 Good day , monsieur , answered Madame Defarge .
 She said the last words out loud , and to herself she added , Ha .
 Good day to you , about forty years old , about five feet nine inches tall with black hair , a handsome appearance , a dark complexion , dark eyes , and long , thin , yellow face with a hooked nose that leans toward the left cheek , giving you a mean look .
 Good day .
 Would you be kind enough to give me a little glass of aged cognac and a drink of cool , fresh water , madame .
 Madame Defarge politely gave him what he asked .
 This cognac is marvelous , madame .
 It was the first time anyone had complimented her cognac , and she knew enough about where it came from to know it was not good cognac .
 She said , however , that the cognac was flattered by his comment and she resumed her knitting .
 The visitor watched her fingers for a few moments and then looked around the wine shop .
 You're very good at knitting , madame .
 I am used to it .
 It's a very pretty pattern too .
 You think so .
 she said , smiling at him .
 Definitely .
 Can I ask what it's for .
 It's just a hobby , said Madame Defarge , still smiling at him while her fingers worked quickly .
 It's not for a particular use .
 It was amazing that the people of Saint Antoine seemed to hate the rose on Madame Defarge's headband .
 Two men had come into the wine shop separately and had been about to order a drink .
 When they saw the rose they stuttered and pretended they were looking for a friend who wasn't there , then they left .
 Of all the people who had been there when the visitor had come in , not one of them was still there .
 They had all gone .
 The spy had been watching but hadn't noticed the sign .
 They had all wandered off in a poor , casual way that looked perfectly normal and innocent .
 John , Madame Defarge thought as she knit the name into her list and kept looking at the stranger .
 If you stay long enough I will have knit ëBarsad' before you've left .
 Do you have a husband , madame .
 I do .
 Children .
 No children .
 Business seems bad .
 Business is very bad .
 All the people are poor .
 Ah , those poor , unlucky people .
 So oppressed too , like you say .
 Gaspard's execution is a shame , madame .
 Ah .
 Poor Gaspard .
 he sighed sympathetically .
 I believe , whispered the spy , looking conspiratorial , I believe there is a lot of sympathy and anger for the poor man in this neighborhood , isn't there .
 Between you and me .
 Is there .
 asked Madame Defarge innocently .
 Isn't there .
 Here is my husband .
 said Madame Defarge .
 As Monsieur Defarge came through the door of the wine shop , the spy saluted him by touching his hat and said with a smile , Good day , Jacques .
 Defarge stopped walking and stared at him .
 Good day , Jacques .
 repeated the spy .
 He didn't speak quite as confidently or smile quite as easily this time .
 You are confused , monsieur , answered the owner of the wine shop .
 You must have confused me for someone else .
 That's not my name .
 I am Ernest Defarge .
 Good day .
 answered Defarge , coldly .
 No one has told me that , said Defarge , shaking his head .
 I know nothing about it .
 Not at all , but I hope to get to know it better .
 I am extremely interested in the unfortunate people who live here .
 Hah .
 Defarge muttered .
 The joy of talking with you , Monsieur Defarge , reminds me , continued the spy , that I am lucky enough to know some things about you .
 Really .
 said Defarge , indifferently .
 That's true , for sure , said Defarge .
 His wife let him know by brushing her elbow against him as she knitted and sang that he should answer , but only as briefly as possible .
 That's true , repeated Defarge .
 Yes .
 said Defarge .
 You don't hear from them much now .
 asked the spy .
 No , said Defarge .
 Actually , Madame Defarge added , looking up from her knitting and her little song , we never hear from them .
 We got the news that they arrived safely in England , and perhaps another letter or two from them , maybe two .
 But since then , they have gone their way , we have gone ours , and we haven't kept in touch .
 Good , madame , answered the spy .
 She is going to be married .
 Going to be .
 repeated Madame Defarge .
 She was attractive enough to have gotten married a long time ago .
 You English are cold people , it seems to me .
 Oh .
 You can tell that I am English .
 You have an English accent , answered Madame Defarge .
 Therefore I assume that you are an Englishman .
 Since he's the one who said it , it's probably false , answered Madame Defarge , raising her eyebrows a little .
 But it might be true .
 If it is Defarge started to say , then stopped .
 If it is .
 repeated his wife .
 And if the revolution comes while we are still alive , I hope for her sake that destiny keeps her husband out of France .
 Her husband's destiny , said Madame Defarge , as calmly as usual , will take him where he is meant to go and to the end that he is meant for .
 That's all I know .
 Stranger things than this will happen when the revolution does come , answered Madame Defarge .
 I have them both here on my list , for sure .
 And they are both here for what they have done .
 That is enough .
 She rolled up her knitting when she said this , then took the rose out of the handkerchief that was wrapped around her head .
 Either the people of Saint Antoine knew instinctively that she had taken out the rose or the people of Saint Antoine were watching for it to be removed .
 Either way , people soon came wandering into the wine shop and things in the wine shop went back to normal .
 But as they worked their fingers , their eyes and minds worked hard .
 And as Madame Defarge moved from group to group , her fingers , eyes , and thoughts got quicker and angrier with every group of women she stopped by to visit with .
 There was never a more glorious sunset on the quiet street corner in Soho than one night when Doctor Manette and Lucie sat under the plane tree together .
 The moon never rose with a gentler glow over London than on that night when it rose as they were still sitting under the tree , and shined through its leaves onto their faces .
 Lucie was to be married the next day .
 She had saved this last night for her father , and they sat alone together under the plane tree .
 Are you happy , father .
 Very happy , my child .
 They hadn't said much , though they had been there a long time .
 When it was still light enough to work and read , she hadn't done her work or read to him as she usually did .
 Many times she had done both as she sat beside him under the tree .
 But tonight was different than all others , and nothing could change that .
 I'm very happy tonight , too , father .
 The love that Heaven has blessed me withmy love for Charles , and Charles's love for me has made me very happy .
 But , if my life wasn't still dedicated to you , or if my marriage pulled us apart , even by the distance of only a few streets , I would be more unhappy and disappointed in myself than I could tell you .
 Even as it is .
 Her voice quivered .
 She embraced him in the moonlight and buried her face in his chest .
 The moonlight is always sad , as is sunlight and human life itself , when it is coming or going .
 Dear father .
 Can you tell me one last time that you are absolutely sure that no new feelings of mine , or responsibilities , will ever come between us .
 I am sure of it , but are you .
 Do you feel sure about it in your heart .
 I hope that is true , father .
 Believe it , my love .
 It is true .
 Think of how natural and easy it is , my dear , for it to be that way .
 You , loyal and young , cannot understand how worried I have been that your life would be wasted .
 She raised her hand to his lips to stop him from speaking , but he took hold of it and repeated the word .
 If I had never met Charles , father , I would have been happy being with you .
 He smiled at her unconscious admission that she would have been unhappy without Charles once she had seen him .
 He answered : 
 It was the first time since the trial that she had ever heard him mention his unhappy past .
 His words made her feel strange in a way she had never felt before .
 She remembered the feeling for a long time afterwards .
 See .
 said Doctor Manette , raising his hand toward the moon .
 I have looked at the moon from my prison window when it was painful to look at .
 I have looked at it when it was such torture to think of the moon shining on all that I had lost that I beat my head against my cell walls .
 I have looked at the moon when I was so tired and depressed that I thought about nothing accept how many lines I could draw up and down and across it .
 He added to himself as he looked at the moon , it was twenty either direction , I remember , and it was difficult to squeeze the twentieth line in .
 The strange feeling she had got stronger as he talked about that time .
 But he wasn't telling her in order to shock her .
 He only seemed to be comparing how happy he was now to the difficult times he had faced before .
 She pulled closer to him and kissed him on the cheek and hand .
 Father .
 Even to hear that you thought such things about a daughter who never existed hurts me as if I had been the daughter you speak of .
 You , Lucie .
 It is because of the comfort and strength that you have brought me that we can talk about these memories now under the moonlight on our last night together .
 What did I say just now .
 So .
 But on other moonlit nights , when I have been in a different mood , one like a sad sense of peace , I have imagined that she came to visit me in my cell and took me out of the prison and to freedom .
 I often imagined her standing in the moonlight as I see you doing now .
 Except that I never got to hold her in my arms .
 The image was between my little grated window and the door .
 But you understand that that is not the child I am talking about .
 No .
 That was another thing .
 It stood before my eyes but it never moved .
 The phantom that I was dreaming about was another real child .
 I don't know anything about what she looked like other than that she looked like her mother .
 The other child looked like her too like you dobut not the same .
 Do you understand what I'm saying , Lucie .
 Hardly , I think .
 You'd probably have to be a lonely prisoner to understand the confusing differences between imagination and reality .
 Even though he was calm she was troubled as he tried to describe what it had been like for him .
 When I was in that more peaceful state of mind , I would imagine her coming to me in the moonlight and taking me out to show me the home where she lived with her husband .
 It was full of memories of her lost father .
 She had a picture of me in her room and prayed for me .
 She led a happy , productive life , but my sad story was still a part of it .
 I hope that I am that child , father .
 O my dear father , will you bless me as eagerly tomorrow .
 He hugged her , asked that Heaven watch over her , and thanked Heaven for giving her to him .
 Then they went into the house .
 No one was invited to the wedding except for MrLorry .
 The only bridesmaid was Miss Pross .
 The married couple wouldn't move to another house .
 They would take the upper rooms that had previously belonged to the lodger that they never saw , and they wanted nothing more .
 Doctor Manette was very happy at their little supper .
 There were only three of them at the table .
 Miss Pross was the third .
 He wished that Charles had been there , and he was nearly ready to object to the romantic little plan that kept Charles away .
 He toasted to him warmly .
 Everything was in order , though .
 It was quiet , and he was sleeping .
 His white hair looked pretty on his pillow , and his hands rested quietly on the blanket .
 She put her candle in the shadows far away and snuck up close to his bed .
 She kissed him , then leaned over and looked at him .
 Being a prisoner had left its marks on his handsome face .
 But he worked so hard to cover up the marks that he hid them even when he was asleep .
 A more remarkable face than his could not be found that night , as he quietly and determinedly struggled with his demons .
 She timidly put her hand on his chest and prayed that she could be as devoted to him as she hoped to be , and as his terrible past deserved .
 Then she removed her hand , kissed him again , and left .
 The sun rose and the shadows of the leaves of the plane tree moved on his face as softly as her lips had moved when she had prayed for him .
 And so , said MrLorry , who could not admire the bride enough and who had been moving around her to see every part of her simple , pretty wedding gown .
 This is why I brought you across the English Channel when you were young , my sweet Lucie .
 Lord bless me .
 I thought I was doing such a small thing .
 I didn't realize how important it would one day be for my friend MrCharles .
 You didn't mean for them to get married , commented the straightforward Miss Pross , and therefore how could you have known that this would happen .
 That's nonsense .
 Really .
 All right .
 But don't cry , said the gentle MrLorry .
 I'm not crying .
 You're crying , said Miss Pross .
 I , my dear Miss Pross .
 By now , MrLorry dared to be nice to her sometimes .
 You were crying just now .
 I saw you , and I'm not surprised about it .
 Your gift of plates and silverware is so impressive that it would make anybody cry .
 There's not a fork or a spoon in the whole collection that didn't make me cry until I couldn't see through my tears when the box arrived last night , said Miss Pross .
 Not at all .
 said Miss Pross .
 You think it's not possible that there could have been a MrsLorry .
 asked MrLorry .
 Pooh .
 answered Miss Pross .
 You were born to be a bachelor .
 And you were made to be a bachelor before you were put into your cradle , continued Miss Pross .
 The doctor offered his arm to Lucie , and he took her downstairs to the chariot that MrLorry had hired for the occasion .
 The rest of them followed in another carriage , and soon Charles Darnay and Lucie Manette were happily married privately in a nearby church .
 It was hard for them to say goodbye , though it didn't last long .
 Her father cheered for her , and gently pulling himself away from her embrace , finally said , Take her , Charles .
 She is yours .
 He had kept many of his feelings to himself , of course , and some strong emotions might have been expected to come out of him once the bride and groom had left .
 But what worried MrLorry was the frightened look on the doctor's face , and the fact that the doctor had absent-mindedly grabbed his head in his hands and wandered off into his room when they got upstairs .
 It reminded MrLorry of Defarge , the owner of the wine shop , and their night ride away from Paris under the stars .
 I think it would be best if we didn't talk to him right now or disturb him at all , he whispered to Miss Pross .
 I need to go to Tellson's Bank .
 I'll go there now and come back very soon , and then we will take him on a ride into the country and eat dinner there .
 Everything will be fine .
 It was easier for MrLorry to stop in at Tellson's than it was for him to leave Tellson's .
 He was delayed there for two hours .
 When he came back , he climbed the old staircase alone without bothering the servant .
 On his way into the doctor's rooms , he heard the sound of quiet knocking .
 Good God .
 he said , startled .
 What's that .
 MrLorry looked at what he was working ona shoe of the old size and shape .
 He picked up another shoe that was lying near him and asked what it was .
 It's a young lady's walking shoe , he mumbled without looking up at him .
 I should have finished it a long time ago .
 Leave it alone .
 The doctor looked up at him in his old mechanical and submissive manner without stopping his work .
 Do you know who I am , my dear friend .
 Think again .
 You are not a shoemaker .
 Think , my dear friend .
 MrLorry took these steps hoping that the doctor would get better again .
 If he recovered soon , MrLorry had a plan .
 There was someone who MrLorry thought would understand the doctor's case the best , and MrLorry would ask for this person's opinion on the matter .
 Hoping that the doctor would recover so that he could put this third plan into action , MrLorry decided to watch him closely but to do it as subtly as possible .
 He took time off from Tellson's Bank for the first time in his life and positioned himself in the window in the doctor's room .
 MrLorry soon discovered that it was useless to speak to him since it made him nervous .
 MrLorry gave up on that idea on the first day and decided instead to stay near him at all times and hope that his quiet presence would stop the doctor's delusions , or at least keep them from getting worse .
 MrLorry stayed at his seat near the window reading and writing and showing in as many pleasant ways as possible that it was a place where they were both free to do whatever they wanted .
 Will you go out .
 Out .
 Yes .
 Will you go for a walk with me .
 Why not .
 When it was night again , MrLorry asked him again as he had done before : 
 Dear Doctor , will you go out .
 Like before , the doctor repeated , Out .
 MrLorry was so tired out by anxiously watching the doctor that he fell asleep .
 On the tenth morning of the doctor's illness , MrLorry was startled by the sun shining into the room , since he had dozed off when it was dark night .
 Even when he was sure that he was actually awake , MrLorry wondered for a few moments whether the doctor's recent shoemaking had all been a dream .
 He could see his friend in front of him dressed and looking as usual , and reading as he normally did .
 Was there any sign that the change in the doctor that he had seen during the past few days had actually happened .
 Miss Pross was there within a few minutes , whispering quietly beside MrLorry .
 If he had any doubts left , the way she spoke about the situation would have decided the matter .
 By then , though , he was clearheaded and had no doubts .
 He decided that they should leave the doctor alone until the usual breakfast time , then they would meet the doctor as if nothing unusual had happened .
 If he seemed to be behaving as he typically did , MrLorry would then cautiously start looking for help from the man whose opinion he so anxiously wanted to hear .
 Miss Pross followed his advice and they worked out the plan carefully .
 MrLorry had plenty of time for his usual toilette the process of attending to your personal appearance toilette , and he arrived at breakfast in his usual white linen with his usual tight stockings .
 The doctor was called as usual , and he came to breakfast .
 If I understand correctly , said the doctor quietly , it's about some mental shock .
 Yes .
 Be specific , said the doctor .
 Give me all the details .
 MrLorry saw that the doctor understood him , and he went on .
 The doctor asked in a low voice , For how long .
 Nine days and nights .
 Yes , that's correct .
 Now , did you ever see him doing that activity when he used to do it before, asked the doctor , carefully , 
 Once .
 And when he relapsed , was he in most ways , or in all ways , as he was then .
 I think he was exactly the same .
 You spoke about his daughter .
 Does his daughter know about his relapse .
 No .
 She has not been told , and I hope she will never be told .
 Only myself and one other trustworthy person know about it .
 But I don't know how to begin in such a case , continued MrLorry .
 If your wisdom , knowledge , and experience could put me on the right track , I might be able to do a lot .
 But uninformed and without help , I can't do much of anything .
 Please talk with me about it .
 Please help me understand it better and teach me how to be of more help .
 I think it's likely that the patient may have expected the relapse you have described , said the doctor , requiring an effort to break the silence .
 Was he afraid it might happen again .
 MrLorry asked .
 Very much .
 He said it with an involuntary shudder .
 You have no idea how troublesome such a fear is to a person , and how difficulthow almost impossibleit is for him to make himself talk about the subject that haunts him .
 Would it help him , asked MrLorry , if he could tell someone else that secret when it is bothering him .
 I think so .
 But it is , as I have told you , almost impossible .
 I even think that , in some cases , it is impossible .
 Would he remember what happened during the relapse .
 asked MrLorry hesitantly .
 The doctor looked around the room sadly , shook his head , and answered quietly , Not at all .
 Now , said the doctor , recovering himself , I have great hope .
 It gives me hope that he recovered from his relapse so soon .
 The fact that he gave in to the pressure of whatever was haunting him and recovered after the spell had passed gives me hope that the worst is over .
 Well , well .
 That makes me feel better .
 I am thankful .
 said MrLorry .
 I am also thankful .
 repeated the doctor , bowing his head with respect .
 There are two other things that I would like help with , said MrLorry .
 May I go on .
 You couldn't do your friend a better favor than to continue .
 The doctor gave him his hand .
 I don't think so .
 It may just be the way he is .
 His mind might always need to be occupied .
 That might partly be in his nature and partly a result of the sickness .
 The less his mind is occupied with healthy things , the more it would be in danger of focusing on unhealthy things .
 He may have noticed this about himself .
 You're sure that he is not under too much stress .
 I think I am quite sure of it .
 My dear Manette , if he were overworked now .
 The occupation the patient took up during this temporary relapse said MrLorry , clearing is throat , we will call it ëblacksmith's work .
 ' Let's say that during the dark times in his past , the patient used to work at a little forge .
 Let's say that we unexpectedly found him at his forge again .
 Isn't it bad for him to keep it close to him .
 The doctor covered his eyes with his hand and tapped his foot nervously on the ground .
 He has always kept it by him , said MrLorry , looking anxiously at the doctor .
 Now , wouldn't it be better to let it go .
 The doctor kept his eyes shaded and kept tapping his foot nervously on the ground .
 Do you find it difficult to give me advice .
 said MrLorry .
 I think it's a good question .
 And yet , I think Then he shook his head and stopped talking .
 He looked a lot like a lost child as he looked up at MrLorry .
 There was another silence .
 You see too , said the doctor , nervously , it is like an old friend .
 I wouldn't keep it , said MrLorry , shaking his head .
 He became more confident as he saw that the doctor was uneasy .
 I would tell the patient to give it up .
 I only lack your power to do it .
 I am sure it does no good .
 Come on .
 Give me your permission , like a good man .
 For his daughter's sake , my dear Manette .
 It was very strange to see the struggle going on within the doctor .
 For her sake , then , let it be done .
 I allow it .
 But I would not take it away while he is there .
 Take it away when is not there .
 Let him miss his old friend after he is gone .
 MrCarton waited until he had a chance to take Darnay aside to a window to speak to him privately .
 I hope that we are already friends , said MrDarnay .
 Naturally , Charles Darnay asked him what he meant .
 I remember a certain evening when you made me admit to you that you had been drinking .
 I'm not worried .
 When you are sincere it doesn't worry me at all .
 Ah .
 said Carton , waving his hand casually as if he were waving away MrDarnay's comment .
 On the drunken night in questionone of many drunken nights for me , as you knowI was rudely speaking about whether I liked you or disliked you .
 I hope you will forget all about it .
 I forgot about it a long time ago .
 You're just being polite again .
 But , MrDarnay , it is not as easy for me to forget things as you claim it is for you .
 I haven't forgotten it at all , and a casual answer doesn't help me forget it .
 Please forgive me if it was a casual answer , answered Darnay .
 I was only trying to take a minor incident that seems , to my surprise , to bother you too much and put it behind us .
 I give you my word as a gentleman that I forgot about it a long time ago .
 Good Heaven , what was there to forget .
 Didn't you do a great favor for me that day that I should remember .
 I need to tell you that the great favor I did for you was actually just professional nonsense , said Carton .
 I don't think that I cared what happened to you when I did it .
 Mind you , I'm saying that that is how I felt back then .
 I am speaking about the past .
 I would rather form my own opinion without hearing from MrStryver .
 Well , at any rate you know that I'm a depraved dog .
 I've never done anything good in my life and never will .
 I don't know if its true that you never will .
 Will you try to come .
 That's another way of saying that you will grant me what I've asked .
 Thank you , MrDarnay .
 I may say that you and I are friends .
 I should think by now that you would , MrCarton .
 They shook hands on the matter , and Sydney Carton turned away .
 Less than a minute afterward he was as unnoticeable as ever .
 He had no idea that his beautiful young wife might be thinking about MrCarton , too .
 But later , when he joined her in their own rooms , she was waiting for him with the usual pretty frown on her forehead .
 You look concerned about something tonight .
 said Darnay , putting his arm around her .
 Yes , dearest Charles , she said , with her hands on his chest , She looked at him with a questioning expression .
 I am rather concerned tonight , for I have something on my mind .
 What is it , my Lucie .
 Will you promise not to ask any questions of me if I ask you not to .
 Will I promise .
 What wouldn't I promise you , my love .
 He brushed her golden hair from her cheek and placed his other hand against her heart .
 I think , Charles , that poor MrCarton deserves more consideration and respect than you gave him tonight .
 Really , my love .
 Why do you say so .
 That is the question you shouldn't ask me .
 But I thinkI knowthat he does .
 If you know it , it's good enough for me .
 What do you want me to do , my darling .
 It hurts me to know that I treated him poorly , said Charles Darnay , surprised .
 I never knew this about him .
 Miss Manette's faith in MrCarton made her look so beautiful that her husband could have looked at her for hours .
 Darnay was moved by her request .
 I will always remember it , dear heart .
 I will remember it as long as I live .
 At first there were times when whatever she was working on would fall slowly out of her hands and she would look sad , even though overall she was a completely happy young wife .
 For there was something coming in the echoes , something far away and barely able to be heard , that upset her .
 She was caught between feelings of hope and doubthopes of a love still unknown to her and doubts that she would stay on earth long enough to enjoy that love .
 In the echoes she would hear the sound of footsteps at her own grave , as if she had died young , and she would think of her husband whom she had left so alone .
 In her imagination , he would mourn so much for her that his eyes would overflow with tears .
 In the years that she worked to bring them closer together and make them a happy family , Lucie heard in the echoes nothing but friendly and soothing sounds .
 Her husband was strong and prosperous .
 Her father was stable and healthy .
 Miss Pross was like an unruly charger a large , strong cavalry horse charger who had been tamed and domesticated , and snorted and pawed at the ground under the plane tree in the garden .
 MrStryver shoved his way toward success as a lawyer , like a ship plowing through rough waters , and dragged his helpful friend MrCarton along with him .
 Sydney , like a sinking boat , had a tough time being dragged along , but since he had always done so , he continued with that life .
 MrCarton's attachment to the life he was used to , unfortunately stronger in him than any desire to desert MrStryver or avoid the disgrace of this life , made that life the one MrCarton was to lead .
 He didn't think any more of being the jackal to MrStryver's lion than a real jackal would think of becoming a lion .
 Stryver was rich .
 He had married an old widow with property and three boys , who had nothing particularly exciting about them but the straight hair on their fat heads .
 But there were other echoes that were rumbling off in the distance all this time .
 And it was around Little Lucie's sixth birthday that they started to get louder , like a great storm in France with a dreadful sea rising .
 One night in the middle of July 1789 , MrLorry came in late from Tellson's Bank and sat down by Lucie and her husband in the dark window .
 It was a hot , wild night , and they were all reminded of that Sunday night years before when they had sat in the same place and watched the lightning .
 I was starting to think that I'd have to spend the night at the bank , said MrLorry , pushing back his brown wig .
 We were so busy all day that we didn't know what to do first or where to go .
 There is such nervousness in Paris that there was actually a run to put money in Tellson's Bank .
 Our customers in Paris can't seem to transfer their property to us fast enough .
 They're all practically mad about sending their valuables to England .
 Looks bad , you say , my dear Darnay .
 Yes , but we don't know what sense there is in it .
 People can be so irrational .
 Some of us at Tellson's are getting old and can't be bothered with unusual things happening unless there's a good reason for it .
 Still , said Darnay , you know how gloomy and threatening the situation is over there .
 Here he is , said the doctor , coming into the dark room .
 I'm happy that you're at home .
 All of this anxiousness that I've been surrounded by all day has made me nervous for no reason .
 You're not going out , I hope .
 No .
 I'm going to play backgammon here with you , if you want , said the doctor .
 I don't think I want to , if I can speak my mind .
 I'm too worried to compete against you tonight .
 Is the tea tray still there , Lucie .
 I can't see it .
 Thank you , my dear .
 Your precious daughter is safe in bed .
 And sleeping soundly .
 It's not a theory .
 just something I like to imagine .
 It's your imagination then , my wise pet , said MrLorry , patting her hand .
 These echoes are very numerous and very loud , though , aren't they .
 Listen to them .
 Stay close to me , Jacques Three , yelled Defarge .
 And you , Jacques One and Two , split up and put yourselves in charge of as many of these patriots as you can .
 Where is my wife .
 Hey .
 Here I am .
 said Madame Defarge , as calm as ever , but not knitting today .
 Instead , Madame Defarge had an axe in her right hand and a pistol and a cruel-looking knife in her girdle .
 Where are you going , my wife .
 I'm going with you right now , said Madame Defarge .
 You'll see me leading the women soon .
 Come , then .
 yelled Defarge loudly .
 Patriots and friends , we are ready .
 To the Bastille .
 With a roar that sounded as if every person in France had yelled the word Bastille , the crowd of peasants rose up and overflowed the city .
 With alarm bells ringing , drums beating , and the crowd thundering like the sea , the attack began .
 Then there was one deep ditch , a single drawbridge , huge stone walls , eight large towers , cannon , muskets , fire , and smoke to contend with .
 One drawbridge had been taken down .
 Work , my friends , work .
 shouted Defarge .
 Work , Jacques One , Jacques Two , Jacques One Thousand , Jacques Two Thousand , Jacques Twenty-Five Thousand , in the name of all the angels or the devilswhichever you preferwork .
 So Defarge the wine seller yelled , still at his cannon , which had long before grown hot from firing .
 The force of the crowd that was sweeping him along was so powerful that he couldn't even catch a breath or turn his head until he was in the outer courtyard of the Bastille .
 There , pushed up against an angle of a wall , he struggled to look around .
 Jacques Three was almost beside him , and Madame Defarge could be seen inside in the distance , still leading some of her women .
 She had her knife in her hand .
 Everywhere there was commotion , celebration , confusion , and deafening noise .
 The prisoners .
 The records .
 The secret prison cells .
 The torture devices .
 The prisoners .
 Show me the North Tower .
 said Defarge .
 Quick .
 I promise I will if you will come with me , answered the man .
 But there is no one there .
 What does One Hundred and Five , North Tower mean .
 asked Defarge .
 Quick .
 What does it mean , monsieur .
 Does it mean a prisoner , or a cell .
 Or should I strike you dead .
 Kill him .
 yelled Jacques Three , who had come up close to him .
 Monsieur , it is a cell .
 Show it to me .
 Come this way , then .
 Jacques Three , looking hungry as usual and apparently disappointed that the conversation had taken a turn that wouldn't lead to bloodshed , held Defarge's arm as Defarge held the prison guard's .
 Their three heads had been close together during this brief conversation , and they could still barely hear each other since the crowd was so loud as it poured into the fortress and covered the courts and hallways and staircases .
 Outside , the walls shook with the roar of the crowd too , and individual yells and sounds could occasionally be heard above the uproar .
 One hundred and five , North Tower .
 Move your torch slowly over these walls so that I can see them , Defarge told the guard .
 The man obeyed , and Defarge looked at the wall carefully as the light passed over it .
 Stop .
 Look here , Jacques .
 said Jacques Three , reading greedily .
 He still had the linstock a long staff designed to hold a lit match and used to fire cannons linstock of his cannon in his hand .
 He traded the gun for the man's crowbar , turned to the worm-eaten stool and table , and smashed them to pieces .
 Nothing in the wood , and nothing in the straw , Jacques .
 Nothing .
 Let's gather all of it in the middle of the cell .
 Light them , you .
 he said to the guard .
 The guard set the little pile on fire , and it blazed high and hot .
 They bent over again to come through the low-arched door , leaving the pile burning behind them , and went back the way they came to the courtyard .
 It seemed their hearing returned as they came down , until they were in the middle of the raging crowd again .
 The crowd was in a frenzy looking for Defarge himself .
 The people of Saint Antoine wanted their wine-shop keeper in the front of the group and guarding the governor , who had defended the Bastille and shot people .
 Otherwise , the governor would not be taken to the Hotel de Ville for judgment .
 Otherwise he might escape and the people would not get revenge on their spilled blood , which had been worthless for so many years but suddenly had value .
 The crowd was dark , destructive , and violent , and its numbers and force were still unknown .
 The crowd of wavering shapes , voices of revenge , and faces hardened by suffering had no pity left in it .
 The exhausted people of Saint Antoine had had only one triumphant week to overcome their suffering with embraces and congratulations .
 Now Madame Defarge sat at her counter at the wine shop serving her customers as usual .
 Madame Defarge wasn't wearing her rose in her hair , for in one short week the large brotherhood of spies had become extremely cautious , as they knew they could soon be hanged like the streetlamps .
 Madame Defarge sat out in the morning sun with her arms folded , thinking about the wine shop and the street .
 In both locations there were several groups of people .
 They were poor and unhappy , but now they had a noticeable sense of power placed over their unhappiness .
 Even the most miserable person in the most tattered nightcap was saying , I know how hard it has become for me to make a living , but do you know how easy it has become for me take your life away from you .
 People who had been unemployed before now had the work of revenge available to them at all times .
 The fingers of the knitting women were vicious , knowing that they could tear .
 Saint Antoine looked different .
 It had been changing into this for hundreds of years , and the final changes of the past week were evident .
 A rumor rushed to them like a line of gunpowder set on fire .
 It's Monsieur Defarge , said Madame Defarge .
 Silence , everyone .
 Defarge came in out of breath , pulled off the red cap he wore , and looked around .
 Listen , everyone .
 Madame Defarge said again .
 Listen to him .
 Defarge stood there , panting as a crowd of people formed behind him outside the door and watched him with eager eyes and open mouths .
 Everyone in the wine shop had jumped to his feet .
 News from the outside world .
 How .
 yelled Madame angrily .
 The other world .
 Does everyone here remember old Foulon , who told starving people that they should eat grass , and who died and was sent to hell for it .
 Everybody does .
 they all responded .
 It's news about him .
 He is here among us .
 Among us .
 everyone responded .
 And dead .
 They all shouted so loudly that a miserable old man more than seventy years old would have known in his heart that Defarge was right .
 A moment of profound silence followed .
 Defarge and his wife looked steadily at each other .
 The Vengeance stooped over , and the bang of a drum was heard as she moved out from behind the counter at her feet .
 Instantly Madame Defarge had her knife in her girdle .
 The drum was beating in the street as if it and the drummer had come together by magic .
 The Vengeance , shrieking loudly and flinging her arms around over her head like all forty Furies snake-haired winged goddesses in Greek mythology who punished wrongdoing Furies , was running from house to house , calling the women to action .
 Nevertheless , they didn't lose a moment .
 Not a moment .
 Foulon was at the Hotel de Ville , and he might be let go .
 He would never be let go , though , if the people of Saint Antoine knew how they had suffered and been insulted and wronged .
 Men and women armed with weapons hurried from the neighborhood so fast , bringing everyone nearby with them , that within fifteen minutes no one remained in Saint Antoine but a few old women and some crying children .
 No .
 By then they were all crowded into the Hall of Examinationwhere this mean , ugly old man was or they overflowed into the nearby streets .
 Monsieur and Madame Defarge , The Vengeance , and Jacques Three were in the front and very close to him in the Hall .
 See .
 yelled Madame Defarge , pointing to him with her knife .
 See the old villain tied with ropes .
 They did well to tie a bunch of grass on his back .
 Ha , ha .
 That was done well .
 Now let him eat it .
 Madame put her knife under her arm and applauded as if she were at a play .
 It wasn't until nighttime that the men and women came back to their homes .
 Their children were crying and hungry , and the poor bakeries were filled with long lines of people who waited patiently to buy bad bread .
 While they waited hungrily , they passed the time by embracing and reliving the triumphs of the day .
 Eventually these lines of poor people broke up and they left .
 Then meager lights began to shine in the windows , and meager fires were made in the streets , where neighbors cooked together , then ate in their doorways afterward .
 It has come at last , my dear .
 But this wasn't the change that took place in the village , and in the many villages like it .
 For many years , the upper class had abused the village and had hardly even come there except to hunt .
 Sometimes they came to hunt people , sometimes animals , for which the upper class preserved pieces of wild and barren wilderness .
 No .
 The change was that the rough lower classes were appearing , rather than that the beautiful upper classes were disappearing .
 The man looked at him , looked at the village in the hollow , looked at the mill and at the prison on the crag .
 When he had seen these , he said in a dialect that was almost unintelligible : 
 How's it going , Jacques .
 All is well , Jacques .
 Touch then .
 They joined hands and the man sat on the pile of stones .
 No lunch .
 Nothing but dinner now , said the repairer of roads , looking hungry .
 It's the same everywhere , complained the man .
 No one has any lunch .
 Touch then .
 This time the repairer of roads said it after watching the man put the object in his pipe .
 They joined hands again .
 Tonight .
 asked the repairer of roads .
 Tonight , said the man , putting his pipe in his mouth .
 Where .
 Here .
 Show me .
 said the man , moving up the hill .
 See .
 answered the repairer of roads , pointing with his finger .
 You go down here , and straight through the street , and past the fountain
.
 To hell with that .
 interrupted the man , looking over the landscape .
 I don't go through the streets or past any fountains .
 Well .
 Good .
 When do you finish work .
 At sunset .
 Will you wake me up before you leave .
 I have walked two nights without stopping .
 Let me finish my pipe and I'll sleep like a baby .
 Will you wake me .
 Of course .
 Good .
 said the traveler , lifting himself up on his elbows .
 Two leagues past the top of the hill .
 The rider who had come from the chateau and the tired horse continued through the village .
 They galloped up the stony hill to the prison on the cliff .
 At the gate , a group of officers was looking at the fire , and a little ways off was a group of soldiers .
 Help , officers .
 The chateau is on fire .
 We might be able to save valuable objects from the flames if we work fast .
 Help .
 Help .
 The officers looked at the soldiers , who were looking at the fire .
 They didn't give any orders , just shrugged and answered , It has to burn .
 Less than a hundred miles away , there were other fires burning and other local officials who weren't as lucky as Monsieur Gabelle .
 That night and other nights , when the sun rose , these officials were found hanging in the once-peaceful streets , where they had been born and raised .
 Also , there were other villagers and townspeople less fortunate than the repairer of roads and his companions , whom the officials and soldiers defeated and hanged .
 Regardless , the four fierce figures who had lit the fire were steadily making their way in four different directionseast , west , north , and southand wherever someone was hanged , fire burned .
 How many people would have to die to satisfy them no official could say .
 Three years went by , and the violence in France grew worse and worse without stop , while the people around it watched in terror and wonder .
 Little Lucie Manette had three more birthdays in her peaceful home .
 August 1792 had come , and the upper class of monseigneurs had by this time fled to many different places .
 Even though you are as youthful as the youngest man that ever lived , said Charles Darnay , hesitating , I still have to suggest to you .
 I understand .
 I am too old .
 said MrLorry .
 You will face bad weather , a long journey , unreliable means of traveling , a country in turmoil , and a city that might not even be safe for you .
 Really .
 You're one to talk .
 said MrLorry .
 You wish you were going yourself .
 You're a Frenchman .
 You're a smart adviser , aren't you .
 When you were talking to Lucie , MrLorry repeated .
 Yes .
 I'm amazed that you're not ashamed to mention her name .
 Wishing you were going to France .
 However , I'm not going , said Charles Darnay , with a smile .
 The point is that you say you're going .
 How I admire your bravery and youthful spirit , MrLorry .
 Tut .
 Nonsense , sir .
 And , my dear Charles , said MrLorry , glancing at the head of the bank again , remember that getting anything out of Paris right now , no matter what it is , is almost impossible .
 Some papers and important matters were brought here just today by the strangest people you could imagine , all of whom could have been seized and had their heads chopped off as they passed through the barriers out of France .
 I'm telling you this in secretit is unprofessional for me to whisper about it , even to you .
  Any other time our packages would come and go as easily as they would here in England .
 Now , everything has stopped .
 And are you really leaving tonight .
 And you aren't taking anyone with you .
 Many different people have been suggested to me , but I don't want any of them .
 I plan to take Jerry .
 Jerry has been my bodyguard on Sunday nights for a long time and I'm used to him .
 Nobody will suspect Jerry of being anything but an English ruffian , or of having any idea in his head but to attack anyone who harms me .
 I have to say again that I admire your bravery and youthfulness .
 I say again that's nonsense .
 When I have completed this little task , maybe I will accept Tellson's offer to retire and live the easy life .
 I'll have enough time then to think about growing old .
 On the morning Charles and Lucie got married , Dr .
 Manette had made one request of Darnay : that the secret of Darnay's real name should be kept between the two of them , unless the doctor decided otherwise .
 Nobody else knew that it was Darnay's name .
 Even Charles's wife , Lucie , had no idea about it , and MrLorry couldn't know .
 No , said MrLorry , answering the head of the bank .
 I think I have asked everybody here , and no one can tell me where to find this gentleman .
 He's the nephew , I believe , or at least the unworthy successor , of the elegant marquis who was murdered , said one of them .
 I'm happy to say I never knew him .
 He was infected with new thought , said a third , looking at the address though a magnifying glass .
 He opposed the last marquis , abandoned the estates when he inherited them , and left them to the peasants .
 I hope the peasants will pay him back as he deserves .
 Hey .
 yelled Stryver .
 Did he .
 Is that the kind of man he is .
 Let's look at his infamous name .
 Damn the fellow .
 I know the man .
 Do you , by Jupiter .
 said Stryver .
 I'm sorry to hear that .
 Why .
 Why , MrDarnay .
 Didn't you hear what he did .
 Don't ask why in these times .
 But I am asking why .
 I understand how to win an argument , MrDarnay , said the bullying MrStryver .
 And I'll do it .
 If this fellow is a gentleman , I don't understand him .
 You can tell him so with my compliments .
 You can also tell him from me that after he gave up his property and title to this mob of butchers , I'm surprised he's not leading the mob himself .
 But , no , gentlemen , said Stryver , looking around and snapping his fingers , I know something about human nature , and I tell you that you'll never find a man like this man trusting the peasants he claims to sympathize with .
 No , gentlemen , he'll always turn and run away very early in a fight .
 With those words , MrStryver snapped his fingers a last time and shoved his way out into Fleet Street .
 The group around him who had been listening cheered and applauded , and MrLorry and Charles Darnay were left alone at the desk as the bank emptied out .
 Will you take the letter .
 said MrLorry .
 You know where to deliver it .
 I do .
 Will you explain that we think it was addressed here in the hopes that we would know where to forward it , and that it has been here for quite some time .
 I will .
 Are you leaving for Paris from here .
 From here at eight o'clock .
 I will come back to see you off .
 To monsieur formerly known as the marquis .
 Oh .
 You , the former marquis , where are you .
 I yell out in my sleep ëWhere is he .
 ' I ask Heaven if you will come and help me .
 But there is no answer .
 Oh , you , the former marquis , I have sent this message across the sea , hoping that you will find it at Tellson's Bank and help me .
 From this horrible prison , where every hour brings me closer to my death , I pledge my sad faith , former marquis .
 Your suffering servant .
 Gabelle .
 This started to persuade Charles Darnay that he needed to go back to Paris .
 He made his decision .
 He had to go to Paris .
 He walked back and forth thinking , until it was time to go back to Tellson's and send off MrLorry .
 As soon as he arrived in Paris he would find MrLorry again , but he wouldn't say anything about his plans now .
 A carriage with post horses was waiting at the door of the bank , and Jerry was there dressed and ready .
 I have delivered that letter , said Charles Darnay to MrLorry .
 I wouldn't let him give me a written answer , but will you take a verbal answer .
 I will , happily , said MrLorry , if it's not dangerous .
 And what is the message to the unlucky prisoner Gabelle .
 It's simply that ëhe has received the letter and will come .
 At a specific time .
 He will leave tomorrow night .
 Any particular person .
 No .
 It was the fourteenth of August , and that night Darnay sat up late and wrote two passionate letters .
 One was to Lucie , explaining his need to go to Paris and assuring her that he would not come to any harm there .
 The other letter was to the doctor , telling him to take care of Lucie and their daughter , and reassuring him as well that he would be fine .
 To both of them he wrote that he would send them letters to let them know he was safe as soon as he arrived .
 The magnet was drawing him quickly back to France now , and the winds and tides were heading toward it .
 He left his two letters with a trustworthy porter and told him to deliver them half an hour before midnight , but no sooner .
 He took a horse to Dover and started his journey .
 For the love of Heaven , justice , generosity , and of the honor of your family name .
 was what Gabelle , the poor prisoner , had said .
 Darnay recalled these words , which gave him strength as he left all that he loved on earth behind him , and sailed back toward France .
 The end of Book Two .
 Charles Darnay had only traveled a few leagues into France when he began to notice that there was no hope of his going back until he had been declared a good citizen in Paris .
 Whatever might happen to him now , he had to continue on to his destination .
 He knew that every village and barrier he passed through was another obstacle between him and England .
 He was watched so carefully that he wouldn't have felt more like a prisoner even if he had been caught in a net , or were being sent to his destination in a cage .
 If he hadn't shown them poor Gabelle's letter from Abbaye Prison , he would not have gotten that far .
 He had so much trouble at the guardhouse in this small town that he thought he was in danger .
 Because of this he was especially surprised when he was woken up in the small inn where he was staying in the middle of the night .
 Emigrant , said the official , I am going to send you to Paris with an escort .
 Citizen , I want nothing more than to get to Paris , though I don't need an escort .
 Quiet .
 said one of the men in the red caps , hitting the bedcover with the handle of his musket .
 Quiet , aristocrat .
 I have no choice , said Charles Darnay .
 Choice .
 Listen to him .
 yelled the same angry man in the red cap .
 As if we weren't doing him a favor by keeping him from being hanged from a streetlamp .
 What this patriot says is always right , said the official .
 Get up and get dressed , emigrant .
 You call me an emigrant , my friends .
 Don't you see that I'm here in France by my own choice .
 The postmaster got between the man and the rider's bridle , which is what the man was apparently moving toward .
 He said soothingly , Leave him alone .
 He will be judged in Paris .
 He lies .
 yelled the farrier .
 He is a traitor since they made the decree .
 His cursed life doesn't belong to him anymore .
 His life belongs to the people of France .
 What decree was the smith talking about .
 Darnay asked the postmaster after he had thanked him and stood next to him in the yard .
 It's a decree for selling property of emigrants .
 When was it passed .
 On the fourteenth .
 That's the day I left England .
 Everybody says it is just one of many , and that there will be more decrees , if there aren't already , that will banish all emigrants and condemn them to death if they return .
 That's what he meant when he said your life is no longer your own .
 But there are no decrees like that yet .
 At daylight they were finally at the walls of Paris .
 The barrier was closed and guarded by many men when they rode up to it .
 Where are the prisoner's papers .
 asked a resolute-looking man in charge , who was called out by the guard .
 After Darnay had waited on his horse for half an hour noticing these things , the same man in charge came out and told the guard to open the barrier .
 Then he gave the drunken sober escorts a receipt for Darnay and asked Darnay to get down off his horse .
 He did so , and the two escorts , leading Darnay's tired horse , turned and rode away without entering the city .
 Citizen Defarge , the officer said to the guard escorting Darnay as he took out a slip of paper to write on .
 Is this the emigrant Evremonde .
 This is the man .
 How old are you , Evremonde .
 Thirty-seven .
 Are you married , Evremonde .
 Yes .
 Where were you married .
 In England .
 Of course you were .
 Where is your wife , Evremonde .
 She is in England .
 Of course she is .
 You will be sent to La Force Prison , Evremonde .
 By Heaven .
 exclaimed Darnay .
 Under what law , and for what crime .
 The officer looked up from his slip of paper for a moment .
 We have new laws , Evremonde , and new crimes , since you were last in France .
 He smiled cruelly as he said it and continued writing .
 Defarge gestured to Darnay with the paper that he had to follow him .
 Darnay obeyed , and two armed citizens went with them .
 Yes , answered Darnay , with a surprised look .
 My wife came to your house to take back her father .
 Yes .
 The word wife caused Defarge to say suddenly , In the name of that new invention called the guillotine , why did you come back to France .
 You heard me say it a minute ago .
 You don't believe it's the truth .
 It's a bad truth for you , said Defarge , speaking with a frown and looking straight ahead .
 Truly I feel lost here .
 Everything is so new , so different , so sudden and unjust , that I feel lost .
 Can you help me .
 No .
 Defarge kept looking straight ahead as he spoke .
 Will you answer one question for me .
 Maybe .
 Depending on what it is .
 What is it .
 In this prison that I am going to so unjustly , will I have some way of communicating with the outside world .
 You'll see .
 Am I going to be shut up there without a trial or any chance to present my case .
 You'll see .
 But , what then .
 Other people have been shut up in worse prisons before in the same way .
 But not by me , Citizen Defarge .
 Defarge looked at him for an answer .
 He walked steadily on in silence , and the quieter he became , the less Darnay hoped that Defarge might soften .
 Therefore , he said quickly : 
 I will do nothing for you , said Defarge , stubbornly .
 My duty is to my country and its people .
 I have sworn to serve them against people like you .
 I will do nothing for you .
 Charles Darnay felt that it was hopeless to beg him anymore , and he was also too proud to do so .
 As they walked on in silence , he couldn't help noticing how the people seemed to be used to seeing prisoners moving through the streets .
 Even the children barely noticed him .
 A few people passing by turned to look at him , and a few shook their fingers at him for being an aristocrat .
 But otherwise , the fact that a well-dressed man was going to prison was no more special than if a man in work clothes should be going to work .
 In one narrow , dark , and dirty street that they passed through , an excited speaker was standing on a stool and speaking to an excited audience about crimes against the people of the king and the royal family .
 The few words that Charles Darnay heard the man say let him know that the king was in prison and that all the foreign ambassadors had left Paris .
 Except for when he had been in Beauvais , he had heard no news on the road .
 His escort and the fact that he was so closely watched had isolated him .
 He knew now that France was a much more dangerous place for him currently than it had been when he had left England .
 He knew that danger had come upon him quickly and that things might get more and more dangerous for him .
 He had to admit to himself that he might not have come if he had known what would happen .
 And yet his concerns weren't as ominous as you would think , looking back on it from this happier time .
 Troubled as his future was , he didn't know his future .
 He knew so little about the coming massacrea horrible massacre that would go on for days and nights and that would taint the gathering time of the harvest with bloodshedit could have been a hundred thousand years away .
 The new invention of the guillotine was hardly known by name to him , or the people of France .
 The terrible things that would soon be done probably didn't even exist in the minds of the people who would do them yet .
 How could gentle people imagine such things .
 What the devil .
 How many more of them are there .
 exclaimed the man with the swollen face .
 I say again , what the devil .
 exclaimed the jailer to his wife .
 How many more .
 In secret , too , complained the jailer , reading the slip of paper .
 As if the prison wasn't already full to bursting .
 Come .
 said the chief , finally picking up his keys , come with me , emigrant .
 Darnay withdrew from these people instinctively , associating prisoners with crime and disgrace .
 But the greatest unreality of his long ride was now their in front of him , as he saw the refinement and grace of these prisoners , who were all members of the upper class .
 These refined manners seemed so out of place in the gloom of the prison that Charles Darnay felt as if he were surrounded by ghosts .
 These ghosts of beauty , stateliness , elegance , pride , frivolity , wit , youth , and age were all waiting here to leave earth .
 They all looked at him with eyes that had been changed by the death they had died in being imprisoned there .
 Charles Darnay revived himself and told him the information as well as he could .
 I don't understand the meaning of the phrase , but I heard them say that I was .
 The group murmured sympathetically as Charles Darnay walked across the room to a grated door , where the jailer waited for him .
 Many voicesamong which the soft and compassionate voices of women were noticeablegave him good wishes and encouragement .
 He turned at the grated door to thank them .
 The jailer closed the door , and he never saw the ghostlike people again .
 The gate opened onto a stone staircase , leading upward .
 When they had climbed forty steps Darnay , who had only been a prisoner for half an hour , already counted them , the jailer opened a low , black door , and they entered a lonely cell .
 It was cold and damp but was not dark .
 This is your cell , said the jailer .
 Why am I locked up alone .
 How do I know .
 Can I buy a pen , ink , and paper from you .
 That night , no man could say how much money would be drawn out of Tellson's Bank in Paris , or how much would stay there , lost and forgotten .
 No man could say what plates and jewels would stay hidden in the bank's vaults while the owners of those items grew old in prison , or when those owners would die violently .
 No man could say how many accounts with Tellson's would never be settled in this world , but carried into the next by their deceased owners .
 No man could answer these questions any more than MrJarvis Lorry could , though he thought seriously about these things .
 He sat by a newly lit wood fire it had turned cold early this year , and on his honest and brave face was a dark look of horror .
 Thank God that no one that I care deeply about is in this awful city tonight , said MrLorry , clasping his hands .
 May God have mercy on all those who are in danger .
 Soon afterward , the bell at the gate rang , and he thought , They've come back .
 He sat there , listening , but there was no loud noise of someone coming into the courtyard as he had expected .
 The gate clanged again , and then everything was quiet .
 
.
 Your husband , Lucie .
 
.
 Charles .
 
.
 What about Charles .
 
.
 He is here .
 
.
 Here in Paris .
 
.
 MrLorry cried out .
 Almost at the same moment , the bell at the front gate rang again and a loud noise of footsteps and voices could be heard entering the courtyard .
 
.
 The doctor turned toward him , with his hand on the window lock , and he said with a calm smile : 
.
 My dear friend , I have a charmed life in this city .
 I have been a prisoner in the Bastille .
 There is no patriot in Paris or all of France who would touch me knowing I had been a prisoner there , unless it was to embrace me and carry me in triumph .
 My suffering has given me a power that got us safely through the barrier .
 It helped us obtain news of where Charles was and helped get us here .
 I knew that would be the case .
 I knew I could help Charles to safety .
 I told Lucie so .
 What is that noise .
 His hand was on the window again .
 
.
 Don't look .
 yelled MrLorry , desperately .
 No , Lucie , my dear , you can't look either .
 He put his arm around her and held her .
 Don't be so afraid .
 I swear I haven't heard anything about Charles being harmed .
 I didn't even suspect that he was here in Paris .
 Which prison is he in .
 
.
 La Force .
 
.
 La Force .
 Lucie , my child , if ever you were brave and helpful in your lifeand I know that you have always been bothyou will pull yourself together and do exactly what I tell you .
 More depends on it than you can think , or I can say .
 There is nothing you can do for him tonight , and you cannot go outside .
 I'm telling you this because what I have to ask you to do for Charles is the hardest thing to do at all .
 You have to listen and be calm and quiet .
 You must go into a room in the back here .
 You must leave your father and I alone for two minutes , and you must do it right now .
 It's a matter of life and death .
 
.
 I will do what you tell me .
 I see in your face that you know I can't do anything else .
 I trust you .
 
.
 What awful people doing such awful work .
 
.
 All of this was seen in an instant , as if it were the vision of a drowning man , or the vision of any person seeing the world at a great turning point .
 They moved away from the window and the doctor looked at MrLorry's pale face , hoping he would explain what they had seen .
 
.
 By that time , Lucie had fallen asleep on the floor at his feet , still holding his hand .
 Miss Pross had laid the child down on MrLorry's bed , where her head had gradually fallen onto the pillow next to Lucie .
 Oh , the long , long night , with Lucie crying out for her husband .
 Oh , the long night , with her father still gone and no word of how he was doing .
 
.
 It was later in the day when MrLorry looked out the window again .
 The sun was shining red on the courtyard , and the grindstone was still standing there alone in the morning air , covered in blood that would never come off .
 
.
 The next day , when business hours came around , one of the first things that occurred to the business-minded MrLorry was that he had no right to endanger Tellson's Bank by protecting the wife of an emigrant prisoner inside the bank .
 He would have risked his own belongings , safety , or life for Lucie without a second thought .
 But he was putting the bank at risk , not just himself , and as far as the bank was concerned , he was a strict businessman .
 
.
 I am your servant , said MrLorry .
 Do you know me .
 
.
 Do you know me .
 
.
 I have seen you somewhere .
 
.
 Maybe at my wine shop .
 
.
 And what does he say .
 What information did he send me .
 
.
 Defarge handed him a scrap of paper .
 It was written in the doctor's handwriting : 
.
 Charles is safe , but I cannot leave here safely yet .
 I have convinced them to let Charles write a short note to Lucie .
 Let Defarge see Lucie .
 
.
 It was dated from La Force Prison within the past hour .
 
.
 Yes , answered Defarge .
 
.
 MrLorry had not yet noticed how strangely reserved and mechanical Defarge was when he spoke .
 MrLorry put on his hat and they went out into the courtyard .
 There , they found two women , one of them knitting .
 
.
 It is she , said Monsieur Defarge .
 
.
 Is Madame Defarge going with us .
 asked MrLorry , noticing that she was moving along with them .
 
.
 Yes .
 She is going so she can see their faces and recognize them .
 It is for their safety .
 
.
 MrLorry was starting to notice the odd way Defarge was behaving .
 MrLorry looked doubtfully at him and led the way , and both of the women followed them .
 The second woman was The Vengeance .
 
.
 There was something about Madame Defarge's touch that made Lucie freeze .
 She stopped as she was putting the note in her bosom , and with her hands near her neck , she gave Madame Defarge a terrified look .
 Madame Defarge looked back at her with a cold , emotionless stare .
 
.
 Lucie , you'd better leave your daughter and Miss Pross here , said MrLorry , doing all he could to appease them .
 Miss Pross is an English lady and doesn't know any French , he told Defarge .
 
.
 Yes , madame , answered MrLorry .
 This is our poor prisoner's darling daughter and his only child .
 
.
 The shadow of Madame Defarge and the other two fell on little Lucie in such a dark and threatening manner that her mother instinctively knelt down on the ground next to her and held her to her chest .
 The shadow seemed to fall on both the mother and her child .
 
.
 That's enough , husband , said Madame Defarge .
 I have seen them .
 We can go .
 
.
 You will be good to my poor husband .
 You won't hurt him .
 You will help me see him if you can .
 
.
 For my sake , then , be merciful to my husband .
 For the sake of my daughter .
 She will pray that you are merciful to Charles .
 We are more afraid of you than we are of these others .
 
.
 Madame Defarge took it as a compliment and looked at her husband .
 Defarge , who had been biting his thumbnail nervously and looking at her , set his face in a stern expression .
 
.
 What did your husband say in that little letter .
 asked Madame Defarge , smiling .
 Influence .
 Something about influence .
 
.
 Surely his influence will get Charles released .
 said Madame Defarge .
 Let it .
 
.
 Madame Defarge looked as coldly as ever at the pleading woman , and turning to her friend The Vengeance , said : 
.
 We've seen nothing else , answered The Vengeance .
 
.
 We have endured this for a long time , said Madame Defarge , looking at Lucie again .
 Judge you .
 Is it likely that the suffering of one wife and mother would matter much to us now .
 
.
 Madame Defarge went back to her knitting and left .
 The Vengeance followed .
 Monsieur Defarge went out last and closed the door .
 
.
 I am not ungrateful , I hope , but that terrible woman has thrown a dark shadow on my hopes .
 
.
 But the way the Defarges were acting had thrown a shadow on him too , and what they had said secretly bothered him very much .
 
.
 As MrLorry listened , and as he watched the face of his friend who was now sixty-two years old , he started to worry that these terrible experiences might cause a relapse of his old dangerous condition .
 
.
 It cut off so many heads that it was stained red along with the ground underneath it .
 It was taken apart and put together again when it was needed , like a puzzle for a terrible young child .
 It silenced those who spoke well , knocked down those who were powerful , and eliminated those who were beautiful and good .
 It had cut off the heads of twenty-two respectable peopletwenty-one of them were alive and one was already deadwithin twenty-two minutes on one morning .
 The executioner who operated it had been nicknamed Samson after the strong man of the Old Testament .
 But with the guillotine , he was stronger than Samson , and more blind , and he tore down the gates of God's own temple every day .
 
.
 Charles had been in prison for one year and three months .
 During that time , Lucie never knew from one hour to the next if the guillotine would cut off his head the next day .
 Every day , carts filled with condemned prisoners rumbled through the streets .
 Beautiful girls .
 attractive women with brown , black , or gray hair .
 young men and women .
 sturdy old men .
 nobles and peasants all went to bleed at the guillotine .
 Every day they were brought from the dark cellars of the prisons to the light of the outdoors and brought through the streets to satisfy the guillotine's thirst .
 Of the Revolution's slogan , Liberty , Equality , Fraternity , or Death , the last one , death , was the easiest to impart .
 O guillotine .
 
.
 If the suddenness of Lucie's misfortune , and the chaos of the time , had stunned her into waiting for Charles's release in idle despair , she would have been like many others in her situation .
 But since she had first found her father in the attic in Saint Antoine , she had always been committed to her responsibilities .
 She was even more committed now , as all who are quietly loyal and good always are .
 
.
 They had only been living this new life of theirs for a few weeks when , upon coming home one night , her father said to her : 
.
 Oh , show me the place , Father , and I will go there every day .
 
.
 The place where she would stand was a dark and dirty corner of a small , winding street .
 The small hut of a wood sawyer a person who saws wood for a living wood sawyer , who sawed logs into pieces for firewood , was the only house at that end of the street .
 The rest of the street was enclosed by walls .
 On the third day Lucie was there , the wood sawyer noticed her .
 
.
 Good day , citizeness .
 
.
 Good day , citizen .
 
.
 I see you're walking here again , citizeness .
 
.
 You see that I am , citizen .
 
.
 The next day he was waiting for her and approached her as soon as she appeared .
 
.
 What .
 You're walking here again , citizeness .
 
.
 Yes , citizen .
 
.
 Ah .
 And you brought a child too .
 This is your mother , isn't it , my little citizeness .
 
.
 Should I say yes , Mamma .
 little Lucie whispered to her mother , pulling close to her .
 
.
 Yes , dearest , said Lucie .
 
.
 Yes , citizen , little Lucie said to the wood sawyer .
 
.
 Part of the piece of the wood fell off as he spoke , and he threw it into a basket .
 
.
 She continued to do this until December .
 Meanwhile , her father moved among all the terrible events happening with a cool head .
 One afternoon , when it was snowing lightly , Lucie arrived at her usual corner .
 It was a day when people were celebrating and there was a festival .
 As she walked through the streets she noticed that the houses were decorated with little pikes that had little red caps stuck on them .
 They were also decorated with three-colored ribbons , and had the standard slogan of the Republic many in three-colored letters , One and Indivisible .
 Liberty , Equality , Fraternity , or Death .
 
.
 The wood sawyer's gloomy little shop was so small that this slogan hardly fit on it .
 He had gotten somebody to write it for him who had barely been able to squeeze in the word death .
 On his rooftop he had placed a cap on a pike , as all good citizens were expected to do , and he had placed his saw in one window with the words Little Saint Guillotine written on it , for now people referred to the guillotine as Saint Guillotine .
 His shop was closed and he wasn't there , and Lucie was relieved to be left alone .
 
.
 I'll do it , Father , and I send him my soul with it .
 
.
 You can't see him , my poor dear .
 
.
 Give me your arm , my love .
 Leave here looking cheerful and brave for your husband's sake .
 That is the best thing you can do .
 They left the spot .
 All of this won't be for nothing .
 Charles is going before the court tomorrow .
 
.
 Tomorrow .
 
.
 I must see MrLorry , repeated the doctor , turning the other way .
 
.
 MrLorry was still at the bank .
 He had never left it .
 He and his records were in frequent demand regarding property that had been taken away from its owners and given to the state .
 He saved what he could for the owners .
 There was no better man alive to be trusted to take care of Tellson's property , and to keep quiet .
 
.
 The sky turned a murky red and yellow , and a mist rose up from the Seine River .
 Night was coming , and it was almost dark when they arrived at Tellson's Bank .
 The elegant former home of the monseigneur was wrecked and empty .
 Above a pile of dust and ashes in the courtyard was a sign that said National Property .
 Republic One and Indivisible .
 Liberty , Equality , Fraternity , or Death .
 
.
 Charles Evremonde , also known as Darnay .
 
.
 This is how the evening paper began at La Force Prison .
 
.
 When someone's name was called , the person would step forward into an area reserved for him .
 Charles Evremonde , also known as Darnay , already knew this .
 He had seen hundred of people go to their deaths this way .
 
.
 Charles Evremonde , also known as Darnay , was finally brought before the court .
 
.
 Cut off his head .
 yelled the crowd .
 He is an enemy of the Republic .
 
.
 The president rang his bell to silence the crowd and asked the prisoner if it was true that he had lived in England for many years .
 
.
 Darnay said it was true .
 
.
 Darnay said he was not an emigrant , he hoped , as the law defines it .
 
.
 The president asked him what proof he had of this .
 
.
 Darnay said it was true , but he hadn't married an English woman .
 
.
 The president asked if the woman was French .
 
.
 The president asked her name and who her family was .
 
.
 The crowd was pleased by this answer , and they cheered Dr .
 Manette , who was well known as a good doctor .
 The crowd was so fickle that several ferocious individuals , who had been glaring at Darnay a moment before as if they wanted to drag him out into the street and kill him , were now crying for him .
 
.
 The president asked why he had returned to France when he did , and not sooner .
 
.
 Darnay said he did not return sooner simply because he had no way of making a living in France except by the ways he had given up .
 In England he made a living by teaching French and French literature .
 He returned when he did after receiving an urgent letter from a French citizen , who told Darnay that his absence had put the citizen's life in danger .
 He came back to save a French citizen's life and to face the truth , whatever personal danger it placed him in .
 He asked if that were a crime in the eyes of the Republic .
 
.
 The crowd yelled enthusiastically , No .
 The president rang his bell to quiet them .
 It didn't quiet them , though , for they continued to yell No .
 until they quieted down on their own .
 
.
 The president asked the name of that citizen .
 Darnay explained that the citizen was his first witness .
 He also referred to the citizen's letter and explained that the letter had been taken from him at the barrier into Paris , but that he believed it was likely there in the papers that the president had in front of him .
 
.
 Lucie .
 My love .
 I am safe .
 
.
 Oh , dearest Charles , let me thank God for this on my knees the way I have been praying to Him .
 
.
 They all bowed their heads in prayer .
 When she was in Darnay's arms again , he said to her : 
.
 And now speak to your father , my dear .
 No other man in all of France could have done what he has done for me .
 
.
 For several months now , Miss Pross and MrCruncher had been in charge of getting supplies .
 Miss Pross would carry the money and Jerry would carry the basket .
 They would go out shopping every afternoon around the time when the streetlamps were lit , and they would buy and bring home whatever they needed .
 Miss Pross could have known as much French as English by now if she'd wanted , having lived with a French family for a long time , but she had no desire to .
 Therefore , she knew no more of that French nonsense as she liked calling it than Jerry did .
 So her way of shopping was to just say the name of what she wanted without any other conversation .
 If it didn't happen to be the right word , she would look around for the thing she wanted , grab it , and hold onto it until she had paid for it .
 She always bargained the price down by holding up one finger less than the number the shopkeeper held up .
 
.
 Jerry told Miss Pross in his hoarse voice that he was ready .
 He had worn all of the rust off of his fingers a long time ago , but he still had spiked hair .
 
.
 It will all be the same to you , miss , if they toast to your health or to the Old One's , answered Jerry .
 
.
 Who's he .
 asked Miss Pross .
 
.
 MrCruncher , with some hesitancy , explained that he meant the devil .
 
.
 Quiet .
 Please , please be careful what you say .
 cried Lucie .
 
.
 I think you can take that liberty , the doctor answered , smiling .
 
.
 For goodness sake , don't talk about liberty .
 We have quite enough of that , said Miss Pross .
 
.
 Quiet .
 Again .
 Lucie protested .
 
.
 MrCruncher , being excessively patriotic , repeated the words in his hoarse voice as if he were at church .
 
.
 Not yet , I'm afraid .
 It would still be dangerous for Charles .
 
.
 What's that .
 she yelled out suddenly .
 
.
 Lucie , the staircase is as quiet as death .
 As he said the last word , someone knocked on the door .
 
.
 Oh , Father , Father .
 Who can this be .
 Hide Charles .
 Save him .
 
.
 He picked up the lamp , walked through the two outer rooms , and opened the door .
 He heard the sound of footsteps hurrying over the floor , and four rough men in red caps entered the room with sabers and pistols .
 
.
 We're looking for the Citizen Evremonde , also known as Darnay , said the first man .
 
.
 I'm looking for him .
 We're all looking for him .
 I know you , Evremonde .
 I saw you brought before the tribunal today .
 You are again a prisoner of the Republic .
 
.
 The four men surrounded Charles , who stood where he was with Lucie and their daughter clinging to him .
 
.
 Tell me why I am a prisoner again .
 
.
 It's enough for you to know that you are to be taken straight back to the Conciergerie .
 They will tell you why tomorrow when you are summoned before the tribunal again .
 
.
 You say you know Charles Darnay .
 Do you know me .
 
.
 Yes , I know you , Citizen Doctor .
 
.
 We all know you , Citizen Doctor , said the other three men .
 
.
 Will you answer Charles's questions for me then .
 Why is this happening .
 
.
 The second man nodded his head and added : 
.
 He has been accused by the people of Saint Antoine .
 
.
 One more thing , the doctor asked .
 Will you tell me who accused him .
 
.
 It's against the rules for me to tell you , answered the first man .
 But you can ask the man from Saint Antoine here .
 
.
 Who was the other person .
 
.
 Are you asking me , Citizen Doctor .
 
.
 Yes .
 
.
 Then you will get your answer tomorrow , said the man from Saint Antoine with a strange look .
 For now , I say no more .
 
.
 As their wine was being measured out , a man got up from a corner where he had been sitting with another man and started to leave .
 As he went out , he came face-to-face with Miss Pross .
 As soon as he faced her , Miss Pross screamed and clapped her hands .
 
.
 What is the matter .
 said the man who had caused Miss Pross to scream .
 He spoke quickly , quietly , and in English .
 
.
 Don't call me Solomon .
 Do you want to get me killed .
 asked the man in a secretive , frightened way .
 
.
 Brother , brother .
 cried Miss Pross , bursting into tears .
 Have I ever treated you so badly that you can ask me such a cruel question .
 
.
 Then stop talking and come outside if you want to speak to me , said Solomon .
 Pay for your wine and come outside .
 Who's this man .
 
.
 He can come outside too , said Solomon .
 Does he think I'm a ghost .
 
.
 You are my brother , and I have always loved you , cried Miss Pross .
 How cruel it is for you to greet me this way and be so cold to me .
 
.
 Miss Pross shook her head and cried silently .
 
.
 If you expect me to be surprised , I'm not , said her brother .
 I knew you were here .
 I know about most people who are here .
 If you don't want to put my life in dangerand I half think you dogo your way as soon as possible , and let me go mine .
 I am busy .
 I am an official now .
 
.
 I told you .
 cried her brother , interrupting her .
 I knew it .
 You want to get me killed .
 I'll be made a suspect by my own sister .
 Just as I am starting to do well for myself .
 
.
 Heaven forbid .
 cried Miss Pross .
 I would rather never see you again , dear Solomon , though I have always loved you and always will .
 Say just one kind word to me and tell me there is no anger or conflict between us and I will let you go .
 
.
 Good Miss Pross .
 As if any conflict between them had been her fault .
 As if MrLorry had not known years ago in their house on the quiet corner in Soho that her precious brother , Solomon , had spent all of her money and abandoned her .
 
.
 May I ask you a question .
 Is you name John Solomon .
 Or Solomon John .
 
.
 Solomon turned toward him with sudden distrust .
 MrCruncher hadn't said a word until now .
 
.
 What do you mean .
 
.
 Well , I don't know exactly what I mean , because I can't remember what your name was back in England .
 
.
 No .
 
.
 No .
 But I'll swear it was a name with two syllables in it .
 
.
 Indeed .
 
.
 Yes .
 The other name was one syllable .
 I know you .
 You were a spy who acted as a witness at the Bailey .
 In the name of the Father of Lies the devil Father of Lies , who was your father too , what name were you called back then .
 
.
 Barsad , said someone else , joining in .
 
.
 The man who had joined in was Sydney Carton .
 He had his hands behind him under his riding coat , and he stood beside MrCruncher as casually as he might have stood at the court of the Old Bailey .
 
.
 Don't be alarmed , my dear Miss Pross .
 I arrived at MrLorry's and surprised him last night .
 We agreed that I wouldn't make my presence known to anyone else until all was well or until I could be of use .
 I am showing myself here so I can ask your brother to have a little talk with me .
 I wish you had a brother with a more respectable job than MrBarsad .
 I wish for your sake that MrBarsad wasn't a prison sheep .
 
.
 Sheep was prison slang for spy at the time .
 Solomon , known as the spy Barsad , was pale , and he turned even paler and asked MrCarton how he dared
.
 What purpose .
 the spy asked .
 
.
 It would be difficult and dangerous to explain in the street .
 Could you do me the favor of meeting with me for a few minutes in secret , at the office of Tellson's Bank for instance .
 
.
 Are you threatening me .
 
.
 Oh .
 Did I say that .
 
.
 If you're not threatening me , why should I go there .
 
.
 Do you mean that you won't tell me why , sir .
 asked the spy uncertainly .
 
.
 You understand me very well , MrBarsad .
 I won't tell you .
 
.
 Carton's casual manner helped his quickness and skill in putting his secret plan into action and dealing with a man like Barsad .
 He noticed this advantage and used it .
 
.
 Come , come , MrBarsad , exclaimed Sydney .
 Don't be ungrateful .
 If it weren't for the great respect I have for your sister , I might not have presented my little proposal so nicely .
 I think it will benefit both of us .
 Will you go with me to the bank .
 
.
 I'll listen to what you have to say .
 Yes , I'll go with you .
 
.
 I suggest that we escort your sister to the corner of her street first .
 Let me take your arm , Miss Pross .
 This isn't a good city for you to be out unprotected at this time .
 And as MrCruncher knows MrBarsad , I will invite him to MrLorry's with us .
 Are we ready .
 Come on then .
 
.
 This is MrBarsad , sir .
 He is Miss Pross's brother , said Sydney .
 
.
 I told you that you had a memorable face , MrBarsad , said Carton , coolly .
 Please sit down .
 
.
 As he took a chair , he supplied the information MrLorry was looking for by saying with a frown , I was a witness at that trial .
 MrLorry remembered immediately and looked at MrBarsad with a clear look of hatred .
 
.
 Arrested just the same .
 When was he arrested , MrBarsad .
 
.
 Just now , if he was already arrested .
 
.
 He might not have known about it beforehand , said MrLorry .
 
.
 But that's alarming when you remember how close everyone knows he is with Darnay .
 
.
 You'll need good cards to win me over , sir , said Barsad .
 
.
 I'll look them over and see what I hold .
 MrLorry , you know what a brute I am and I how much I like to drink .
 Please give me a little brandy .
 
.
 I don't understand what you plan to do , answered Barsad , uneasily .
 
.
 I plan to play my ace and denounce you , MrBarsad , to the closest Section Committee .
 Look over your hand , MrBarsad , and see what cards you have to play .
 Take your time .
 
.
 MrCarton pulled the bottle of brandy toward him , poured himself another glass , and drank it .
 He saw that Barsad was worried he would get drunk and want to denounce Barsad immediately .
 Seeing this , Carton poured another glass and drank it .
 
.
 Look over your cards carefully , MrBarsad .
 Take your time .
 
.
 You don't seem to like your cards , said Sydney calmly .
 Will you play your hand .
 
.
 I will play my ace in a few minutes and accuse you , MrBarsad , without any doubts , said Carton , answering himself and looking at his watch .
 
.
 There is no better way for me to prove that I respect your sister than to finally relieve her of her brother , said Sydney Carton .
 
.
 I have completely made my mind up about it , answered Carton .
 
.
 Now that I think about it , I'm pretty sure I have another good card here that I haven't mentioned yet .
 That friend and fellow spy who said he spends time in the prisons .
 Who was he .
 
.
 He's French .
 You don't know him , said Barsad , quickly .
 
.
 French , huh .
 repeated Carton , thinking it over .
 He didn't seem to notice Barsad at all , although he repeated the word after him .
 Well , he might be .
 
.
 He is , I assure you , said Barsad .
 Though it's not important .
 
.
 I don't think so .
 I'm sure you don't .
 You can't , said Barsad .
 
.
 He's from the countryside , said Barsad .
 
.
 No .
 He's foreign .
 cried Carton , hitting the table with his open hand as it became clear to him .
 Cly .
 He was disguised , but that was Cly .
 That man was at the trial at the Old Bailey .
 
.
 From where he was sitting , MrLorry suddenly became aware of a strange goblin-like shadow on the wall .
 He looked to where it was coming from and discovered that it was caused by MrCruncher's hair , which had suddenly risen and stiffened even more than usual .
 
.
 MrLorry saw the shadow on the wall grow longer , and MrCruncher stepped forward .
 His hair could not have been standing up any more if it had been arranged by the cow with the crumpled horn in the house that Jack built the quote , which describes a cowlick , is from This Is the House That Jack Built , by Mother Goose the cow with the crumpled horn in the house that Jack built .
 
.
 Barsad didn't see MrCruncher standing beside him , and MrCruncher tapped him on the shoulder .
 
.
 So you put Roger Cly in his coffin , master .
 asked MrCruncher , coldly .
 
.
 I did .
 
.
 Who took him out of it .
 
.
 I mean that he was never in it , said MrCruncher .
 No .
 He wasn't .
 You can chop off my head if he was ever in it .
 
.
 Barsad looked around at MrCarton and MrLorry .
 They both looked at Jerry in astonishment .
 
.
 I tell you that you buried cobblestones and dirt in that coffin , said Jerry .
 Don't tell me that you buried Cly .
 It was a scam .
 I and two more people know it .
 
.
 How do you know .
 
.
 No .
 answered Barsad .
 I give up .
 I confess that we were so unpopular with the mob that I only got away from England at the risk of being drowned to death , and that Cly was being chased so much that he never would have gotten away if he hadn't faked his own death .
 Though how MrCruncher knows that it was a scam I have no idea .
 
.
 Not very much .
 You are a prison guard at the Conciergerie .
 
.
 I'll tell you for sure that there is no way to escape , said Barsad , firmly .
 
.
 Why are you telling me what I didn't ask .
 You are a guard at the Conciergerie .
 
.
 I am sometimes .
 
.
 You can be a guard there when you want to be .
 
.
 I can go in and out when I choose .
 
.
 Sydney Carton filled another glass with brandy and poured it slowly on the hearth of the fireplace .
 He watched it as it spilled out , and after it was all gone he said , getting up : 
.
 So far , we have spoken in front of these two because it made sense that this discussion wasn't just between the two of us .
 Now let's go into this dark room and have one final word alone .
 
.
 Sydney Carton and Barsad were in the dark room next door , speaking so quietly that no sound was heard .
 MrLorry looked at Jerry with doubt and mistrust .
 The way Cruncher , the honest businessman , reacted to this look didn't make MrLorry any more confident .
 Cruncher shifted back and forth on his feet as often as if he had fifty feet and were standing on each of them .
 He looked at his fingernails a little too closely , and whenever MrLorry looked him in the eye , MrCruncher would cough and put his hand over his mouth like a man who was hiding something .
 
.
 MrCruncher came toward him , moving sideways and leading with one shoulder .
 
.
 What job have you had , besides being a messenger .
 
.
 After thinking about it and looking intently at MrLorry , MrCruncher had the bright idea of answering , It's of an agricultural nature .
 
.
 I am concerned that you have used the respectable and great Tellson's Bank as a cover , and that you have been doing something illegal .
 If you have , don't expect me to remain friendly with you when you get back to England .
 If you have , don't expect me to keep your secret .
 You cannot take advantage of Tellson's Bank .
 
.
 Now , what I would like to offer you , sir , continued MrCruncher , even if it was true , which I don't say it is
.
 Don't avoid the question , said MrLorry .
 
.
 At least that is true , said MrLorry .
 Don't say any more for now .
 I might still be your friend , if you deserve it , and if you repent in action , not just in words .
 I don't want to hear any more words .
 
.
 MrCruncher was rubbing his forehead with his knuckle as Sydney Carton and Barsad came back from the dark room .
 Adieu , MrBarsad , said Carton .
 Now that we have made our arrangement , you don't have to be afraid of me .
 
.
 He sat down in a chair by the fire near MrLorry .
 When they were alone , MrLorry asked him what he had done .
 
.
 Not much .
 If things should go badly with Darnay in prison , I have made sure that we will be able to visit him once .
 
.
 MrLorry looked disappointed .
 
.
 But if things go badly in front of the tribunal , going to visit him won't save him , said MrLorry .
 
.
 I never said that it would .
 
.
 To return to the subject of poor Darnay , said Carton .
 Don't tell Lucie about this conversation or the arrangement we have made .
 She won't be able to go see him .
 She might think that , in the worst case , it was arranged to bring him a way of killing himself before he was sent to the guillotine .
 
.
 I am going there right now .
 
.
 I'm glad .
 She's attached to you and relies on you .
 How does she look .
 
.
 Anxious and unhappy , but very beautiful .
 
.
 Ah .
 
.
 I forgot it , he said .
 
.
 MrLorry looked at his face again .
 He noticed a wasted look that tarnished his naturally handsome face and was reminded of the expression on the faces of prisoners he had seen lately .
 
.
 And your work here is coming to an end , sir .
 said Carton , turning toward him .
 
.
 Yes .
 As I was telling you last night when Lucie came in so unexpectedly , I have finally done all I can do here .
 I had hoped to leave the Manettes perfectly safe and then to leave Paris .
 I have my pass , which allows me to leave the city .
 I was ready to go .
 
.
 They were both silent .
 
.
 You have had a long life to look back on , sir .
 said Carton thoughtfully .
 
.
 I am seventy-eight years old .
 
.
 You have worked hard all your life .
 You have always been busy .
 You are trusted , respected , and looked up to .
 
.
 I have been a businessman ever since I became a man .
 I was even a businessman when I was still a boy .
 
.
 Look at what you are doing at the age of seventy-eight .
 How many people will miss you when you die .
 
.
 I am a lonely , old bachelor , answered MrLorry , shaking his head .
 Nobody will weep for me when I die .
 
.
 How can you say that .
 Wouldn't Lucie weep for you .
 Wouldn't her daughter .
 
.
 Of course .
 
.
 That's true , MrCarton .
 I think they would be .
 
.
 I understand that feeling .
 exclaimed Carton , blushing .
 And you are the better for it .
 
.
 I hope so .
 
.
 Carton ended the conversation then by getting up to help MrLorry put his coat on .
 But youyou are young , said MrLorry , returning to the subject .
 
.
 Yes , said Carton .
 I am not old , but my youthful behavior was not a good way to age .
 Enough about me .
 
.
 And enough about me , said MrLorry .
 Are you going out .
 
.
 I'll walk with you to Lucie's gate .
 You know my wandering and restless habits .
 If I roam the streets for a long time , don't worry .
 I will come back in the morning .
 You are going to the court tomorrow .
 
.
 Yes , unfortunately .
 
.
 I'll be there , but only as a member of the crowd .
 Barsad will find a place for me .
 Take my arm , sir .
 
.
 It was ten o'clock at night when he arrived in front of La Force Prison , where she had stood hundreds of times .
 A little wood sawyer had closed up his shop and was smoking his pipe in the shop door .
 
.
 Good evening , citizen , said Sydney Carton .
 He paused as he went by , for the man was looking at him curiously .
 
.
 Good evening , citizen .
 
.
 How's the Republic doing .
 
.
 You mean the guillotine .
 Not bad .
 Sixty-three people killed today .
 We will make it to a hundred soon .
 The executioner , Samson , and his men complain sometimes of being exhausted .
 Ha , ha , ha .
 He's funny , that Samson .
 Such a barber wielding our National Razor .
 
.
 Do I see people getting ëa shave' .
 Always .
 Every day .
 He's quite the barber .
 You've seen him at work .
 
.
 Never .
 
.
 Go and see him when he has a good group of prisoners .
 Think about this , citizen .
 He killed sixty-three people today , in less time than it took me to smoke two pipes .
 Less than two pipes .
 I swear .
 
.
 You speak like a Frenchman .
 
.
 I studied a long time here .
 
.
 Ah-ha , you're like a perfect Frenchman .
 Good night , Englishman .
 
.
 Good night , citizen .
 
.
 But go and see the executioner , the little man continued , yelling after him .
 And take a pipe with you .
 
.
 This is for you , citizen .
 
.
 It's for me .
 
.
 You'll make sure to keep them separate , citizen .
 You know what will happen if you mix them .
 
.
 I know perfectly well .
 
.
 The chemist made up some small packets and gave them to MrCarton , who put them in the breast pocket of his inner coat one by one .
 He counted out the money for them , paid the shopkeeper , and left the shop quickly .
 There is nothing more I can do until tomorrow , he said , looking up at the moon .
 I can't sleep .
 
.
 He looked at the lit windows where people were going to sleep and could forget the horrible things happening around them for a few calm hours .
 He looked at the towers of the churches where no one was praying , for the people were even disgusted by religion after years of corruption by thieves , vagrants , and people acting as priests .
 He looked at the graveyards far away reserved for eternal sleep , as it was written on the graveyard gates .
 He looked at the surrounding jails and the streets along which the sixty or so condemned people were carried in carts to their deaths .
 This had become so common that no one even made up ghost stories about the people killed at the guillotine .
 He thought about the lives and deaths of everyone in Paris as they all settled down to sleep .
 Then Sydney Carton crossed the Seine River again and headed for better-lit streets .
 
.
 Now that the streets were quiet and the night continued on , the words echoed around him .
 He was completely calm and steady .
 Sometimes he repeated them out loud to himself as he walked , but he heard them continuously in his head .
 
.
 There was hardly any order of procedure at the unjust tribunal that assured an accused person of receiving a fair hearing .
 The Revolution had eliminated all of the laws , formalities , and ceremonies of the government , the terrible abuse of which caused the Revolution in the first place .
 
.
 In this way , in as few words or fewer , the public prosecutor pronounced his sentence .
 
.
 The president asked if Darnay had been denounced openly or secretly .
 
.
 The prosecutor answered , Openly , president .
 
.
 By three people .
 Ernest Defarge , a wine seller from Saint Antoine , answered the prosecutor .
 
.
 Good .
 
.
 Therese Defarge , his wife .
 
.
 Good .
 
.
 President , I protest that this is a forgery and a fraud .
 You know that Darnay is my daughter's husband .
 My daughter , and those she loves , are much more important to me than my own life .
 Who and where is the liar who says that I denounced my daughter's husband .
 
.
 Calm down , Citizen Manette .
 To speak out of turn against the authority of the tribunal is breaking the law .
 Regarding what is more important to you than your life , nothing can be as important to a good citizen as the Republic .
 
.
 If the Republic demanded that you give up even your own child , you would have to sacrifice her .
 Listen to what will follow .
 In the meantime , be quiet .
 
.
 You did good work at the taking of the Bastille , Citizen Defarge .
 
.
 I believe so .
 
.
 It was The Vengeance who was yelling .
 The crowd cheered warmly along with her , and the president rang his bell .
 But The Vengeance , feeling encouraged , shrieked , I defy that bell .
 and the crowd cheered her again .
 
.
 Tell the tribunal what you did at the Bastille that day , Citizen Defarge .
 
.
 Let it be read .
 
.
 I , Alexandre Manette , an unfortunate doctor , born in Beauvais and later a resident of Paris , am writing this paper in my cell in the Bastille in December 1767 .
 I write it a few moments at a time , under very difficult conditions .
 I plan to hide it in the wall of the chimney , where I have slowly and with much difficulty made a hiding place for it .
 Someone might find it there when my sorrows and I have both died away .
 
.
 The carriage stopped as soon as the driver could slow down the horses , and the same voice called to me by name .
 I answered .
 The carriage was so far ahead of me by then that the two gentlemen had time to open the door and get out before I came up to it .
 
.
 I am .
 
.
 ëGentlemen , ' I answered , ëI am the man that you speak of so kindly .
 '
.
 They were both intimidating .
 As they said this , they both moved so that I was between them and the carriage door .
 They were armed , and I was not .
 
.
 The man who had spoken second answered this .
 ëDoctor , the clients who need your help are important people .
 We are confident in your skills and are sure you can decide for yourself what the illness is better than we can describe it .
 Enough .
 Will you please get in the carriage .
 '
.
 I could do nothing but obey , and I got into the carriage in silence .
 They both got in after me , the last one in jumped in after putting up the steps .
 The carriage turned around and drove on as fast as before .
 
.
 I repeat the conversation that followed exactly as it occurred .
 I have no doubt that it is , word for word , the same .
 I describe everything exactly as it happened and force my mind to stay focused on the task .
 The broken marks that follow indicate where I stopped writing for the moment and returned my paper to its hiding place .
 
.
 ***
.
 There was nothing unusual about this , as I had seen common people hit more often than dogs .
 But the second of the two men , who was also angry , hit the man in the face with his arm .
 Their look and behavior was so exactly alike that this was when I first noticed they were twin brothers .
 
.
 I saw this in the first minute of examining the patient .
 In her twisting and turning she had turned over on her face on the edge of the bed .
 She had taken the end of the scarf in her mouth and was in danger of suffocating .
 The first thing I did was to reach out my hand to help her breathe , and in moving aside the scarf , I saw the embroidered coat of arms .
 
.
 To distinguish between the two brothers , I will call them the older and the younger .
 By the older , I mean the one that seemed to be in charge .
 It was the older brother who replied , ëSince about this time last night .
 '
.
 ëShe has a husband , a father , and a brother .
 '
.
 ëShe has a brother .
 '
.
 ëYou are not her brother .
 '
.
 He answered with great contempt , ëNo .
 '
.
 ëShe has some recent connection with the number twelve .
 '
.
 The younger brother impatiently joined in , ëDo you mean with twelve o'clock .
 '
.
 ëSee , gentlemen , ' I said , keeping my hands on her chest , ëI am useless as you have brought me .
 If I had known what I was coming to see , I could have brought what I needed .
 As it is , we must lose more time .
 There is nowhere to find medicine out here in this lonely place .
 '
.
 * * *
.
 I opened some of the bottles , smelled them , and put the stoppers to my lips .
 I wouldn't have used any of them unless I wanted to narcotics that were poisons in themselves .
 
.
 ëDo you think they won't work .
 ' asked the younger brother .
 
.
 You see , monsieur , I'm going to use them , ' I replied , and said no more .
 
.
 ëThere is another patient .
 '
.
 ***
.
 A handsome peasant boy was lying on his back on some hay on the ground , with a cushion under his head .
 The boy wasn't older than seventeen .
 His teeth were clenched , his right hand was grabbing his chest , and his eyes were staring straight up .
 I couldn't see where his wound was as I kneeled over him on one knee , but I could see he was dying of a stab wound .
 
.
 ëI am a doctor , my poor fellow , ' I said .
 ëLet me examine it .
 '
.
 ëI don't want you to examine it , ' he answered .
 ëLeave it alone .
 '
.
 ëHow did this happen , monsieur .
 ' I asked one of the brothers .
 
.
 ëHe's a crazy young peasant .
 A serf .
 He forced my brother to draw his sword on him , and he has been wounded by my brother's swordlike a gentleman .
 '
.
 There was no hint of pity , sorrow , or humanity in his answer .
 He seemed to admit that it was inconvenient to have a peasant dying there and that it would have been better if he had died unnoticed , as peasants usually did .
 He was unable to feel any compassion for the dying boy .
 
.
 ëDoctor , these nobles are very proud .
 But sometimes we peasants are proud , too .
 They steal from us , anger us , beat us , and kill us .
 But sometimes we still have a little pride left .
 Shehave you seen her , doctor .
 '
.
 The screams and cries could be heard there , although they were quieter and in the distance .
 The boy referred to them as if she were lying there near us .
 
.
 I said , ëI have seen her .
 '
.
 It was very difficult for the boy to find the strength to speak .
 But he spoke with a dreadful passion .
 
.
 The boy had been staring into my eyes .
 He slowly turned to the brothers , and I saw in their faces that everything he said was true .
 The pride of the boy confronted the pride of the two brothers .
 Even here in the Bastille I can see the gentleman's indifference and the oppressed boy's desire for revenge .
 
.
 Nothing could have kept the boy alive except for his determination to tell how they had been wronged .
 He fought back death the way he forced his right hand to remain clenched over his wound .
 
.
 The room was growing dark to him .
 The world was growing narrow around him .
 I looked around me and saw that the hay and straw had been trampled all over the floor , as if there had been a struggle there .
 
.
 ëMy sister heard me and ran in .
 I told her not to come near us until he was dead .
 He came in , and first he threw me some pieces of money .
 Then he struck at me with a whip .
 But I , though a common peasant , struck him hard enough to make him draw his sword .
 Let him break his sword , stained with my peasant blood , into as many pieces as he can .
 He drew to defend himself and used all his skill to stab me .
 '
.
 ëNow lift me up , Doctor .
 Lift me up .
 Where is he .
 '
.
 ëHe .
 As proud as these nobles are , he is afraid to see me .
 Where is the man who was here .
 Turn my face so I can see him .
 '
.
 ***
.
 When I went back to the bedside of the young woman , I found her screaming exactly as she had been before .
 I knew that this might go on for many hours and would probably end with her death .
 
.
 ëShe's not dead , ' I said .
 ëBut it is likely that she will die .
 '
.
 ëThere is great strength in sorrow and despair , ' I answered .
 
.
 I listened to the patient's breathing and didn't answer .
 
.
 ëAre you paying attention , Doctor .
 '
.
 ëMonsieur , in my profession , the things said by a patient are always kept secret , ' I said .
 I was careful with my answer , because I was troubled by what I had seen and heard .
 
.
 ***
.
 It is very difficult for me to write .
 It is so cold , and I am so afraid of being discovered and sent to an underground cell in total darkness , that I must cut my story short .
 I am not confusedmy memory is still sharp , and I can remember every word that was spoken between those brothers and me .
 
.
 She lasted for a week .
 Toward the end I could understand a few syllables that she said to me if I put my ear close to her lips .
 She asked me where she was , and I told her .
 She asked me who I was , and I told her .
 I asked her for her family name , but she wouldn't tell me .
 She shook her head a little on her pillow and kept her secret , as the boy had done .
 
.
 I had no chance to ask her any questions until I had told the brothers that she was fading fast and would not live another day .
 Until then , although no one was ever present with us except for the peasant woman and myself , one of the brothers had always sat behind the curtain at the head of the bed when I was there .
 When they realized that she was going to die , though , they didn't seem to care what conversation I had with her .
 The thought passed through my mind that it was as if I were dying too .
 
.
 The brothers were waiting in a room downstairs , impatient to ride away .
 I had heard them while I was alone at the bedside hitting their boots with their riding whips and pacing up and down .
 
.
 Is she finally dead .
 asked the older brother when I went in .
 
.
 ëShe is dead , I said .
 
.
 ëCongratulations , brother , ' was what he said as he turned around .
 
.
 He had offered me money before , which I had avoided taking .
 Now he gave me a rouleau a stack of coins wrapped in a paper cylinder rouleau of gold .
 I took it from him but laid it on the table .
 I had thought about it before and had decided not to accept anything from them .
 
.
 ëPlease excuse me , ' I said .
 ëBut I can't accept this under the circumstances .
 '
.
 ***
.
 I am tired , tired , tired .
 I am worn down by suffering , and I can't read what I have written with this thin hand of mine .
 
.
 I was very busy that day and couldn't finish my letter than night .
 I rose much earlier than my usual time the next morning to finish it .
 It was the last day of the year .
 The finished the letter was lying in front of me when I was told that a lady had arrived and was waiting to see me .
 
.
 ***
.
 My memory is still accurate , but I cannot write down the exact words of our conversation .
 I suspect that I am being watched more closely than before , and I don't know when I might be watched .
 She had partly suspected and partly discovered the main facts of the terrible story and what part her husband had played in it .
 She knew that I had been brought to help , but she didn't know that the girl was dead .
 She told me that she had hoped to secretly show her a woman's sympathy .
 She had hoped to keep the wrath of Heaven from her noble family , which had long mistreated the suffering commoners .
 
.
 She believed there was a younger sister who was still alive , and she wanted most of all to help the sister .
 I could only tell her that the sister existed .
 I knew nothing beyond that .
 She had come to me secretly in hopes that I could tell her their name and where they lived .
 To this day I don't know either .
 
.
 ***
.
 These scraps of paper will get me in trouble .
 One of them was taken away from me yesterday , with a warning .
 I have to finish my story today .
 
.
 She kissed the boy and caressed him and said , ëIt's for your own sake .
 You will be faithful to me , won't you , little Charles .
 ' The child answered bravely , ëYes .
 ' I kissed her hand and she took him in her arms , and went away caressing him .
 I never saw her again .
 
.
 If God had put it in the heart of either of the brothers , in all these frightening years , to give me any news of how my wife is doingeven just to know if she were alive or deadI might have thought that God hadn't abandoned them .
 But now I believe that the mark of the cross that the dying boy had made with his blood is fatal to them , and that they will not receive His mercy .
 I , Alexandre Manette , a sad prisoner , do tonight , December 31st , 1767 , in my unbearable suffering , denounce the Evremonde brothers and all their descendants to the last of their family , to the time when these things will be answered for .
 I denounce them to Heaven and Earth .
 
.
 The doctor has a lot of influence , does he .
 murmured Madame Defarge , smiling to The Vengeance .
 Let's see if you can save him now , Doctor .
 
.
 If I could touch him .
 If I could embrace him just once .
 Oh , good citizens , will you have compassion for us .
 
.
 Farewell , darling .
 This is the last blessing I will give you .
 We will meet again in Heaven , where the weary finally rest .
 
.
 This is what Darnay said to Lucie as he held her to his chest .
 
.
 I send it to her through you .
 I kiss her by kissing you .
 I say farewell to her by saying it to you .
 
.
 My husband .
 No .
 One moment .
 He was pulling himself apart from her .
 We will not be separated long .
 I feel that this will break my heart and that I will die soon , but I will take care of her while I can .
 When I die , God will send friends to take care of her , as He did for me .
 
.
 No , no .
 What have you done that should make you kneel before us .
 We know now how much you struggled before .
 We know now what you went through when you suspected my family history and when you learned that it was true .
 We know now the feelings of hatred toward me that you fought against and conquered for the sake of your daughter .
 We thank you with all our hearts , and all our love and duty .
 Heaven be with you .
 
.
 Then , Sydney Carton came out of the hidden corner from which he had never moved and picked her up .
 Only her father and MrLorry were with her .
 His arm trembled as he raised her and supported her head , yet there was a manner about him that wasn't all pity .
 There was something proud in him .
 
.
 Shall I take her to a coach .
 She's so light , I won't even feel her weight .
 
.
 He carried her easily to the door and laid her tenderly down in a coach .
 Her father and MrLorry got into it , and Carton took his seat beside the driver .
 
.
 He leaned over the child and laid her cheek against his face .
 He pulled her off of him gently and looked at her unconscious mother .
 
.
 Before I go , he said , pausing , may I kiss her .
 
.
 They remembered afterward that when he bent down and kissed her face , he murmured some words .
 Little Lucie , who was closest to him , told them afterward , and told her grandchildren when she was an old woman , that she heard him say , A life you love .
 
.
 Try to use your influence again .
 There isn't much time between now and tomorrow afternoon , but try .
 
.
 I intend to try .
 I won't rest for a moment .
 
.
 Immediately after dark , I hope .
 Within an hour or two from now .
 
.
 Yes .
 
.
 Good luck .
 
.
 I have no hope , said MrLorry , in a quiet , sorrowful whisper .
 
.
 Neither have I .
 
.
 So do I .
 I heard the sound of an axe falling in their screams .
 
.
 MrLorry leaned his arm on the doorpost and buried his face in it .
 
.
 And with that , Carton walked confidently downstairs .
 
.
 Sydney Carton paused in the street , unsure where to go .
 We're meeting at Tellson's Bank at nine o'clock , he said , thinking it over .
 Would it be good to be seen in public in the meantime .
 I think so .
 It's best that people know that a man that looks like me is here in Paris .
 It's a smart precaution to take , and it might be necessary to prepare for later .
 But wait .
 Let me think it over .
 
.
 He repeated his order .
 
.
 Are you English .
 Madame Defarge asked , raising her dark eyebrows at him questioningly .
 
.
 Defarge brought him his wine and wished him a good evening .
 
.
 Good evening .
 
.
 Oh .
 Good evening , citizen , said Carton , filling his glass .
 Ah .
 and good wine .
 I toast my glass to the Republic .
 
.
 It's true what Madame Defarge says , said Jacques Three .
 Why stop now .
 That makes a lot of sense .
 Why stop now .
 
.
 We stop after they have been exterminated , said Madame Defarge .
 
.
 Wonderful .
 said Jacques Three , hoarsely .
 The Vengeance also enthusiastically approved .
 
.
 I saw his face .
 repeated Madame Defarge hatefully and angrily .
 Yes .
 I saw his face .
 I see that his face is not the face of a true friend to the Republic .
 Let him worry about his face .
 
.
 I have seen his daughter , repeated Madame Defarge .
 Yes , I have seen his daughter several times .
 I saw her today and I have seen her other days .
 I have seen her in court and I have seen her in the street by the prison .
 Let me just raise a finger Carton thought that she raised it , although he never looked up from his paper .
 She let it fall with a rattle on the edge of the counter in front of her , as if it were an axe falling .
 
.
 Madame Defarge is superb .
 said Jacques Three hoarsely .
 
.
 As far as you are concerned , continued Madame Defarge unforgivingly to her husband , if it depended on youwhich , fortunately , it does notyou would rescue Darnay right now .
 
.
 No .
 Defarge argued .
 Not even if I could save him just by raising this glass .
 But I would end it there .
 I say we should stop there .
 
.
 It's true , Defarge agreed , without being asked .
 
.
 It's true , agreed Defarge .
 
.
 It's true , agreed Defarge .
 
.
 It's true , agreed Defarge once more .
 
.
 Then tell the wind and fire where to stop , answered Madame Defarge .
 But don't tell me .
 
.
 Jacques Three and The Vengeance seemed to enjoy hearing the reasons for her wrath , and both praised her highly .
 Carton could feel how angry she was without looking at her .
 Defarge was a weak minority in the group .
 He added a few words about the memory of the compassionate wife of the marquis , but his wife only repeated her last answer .
 Tell the wind and fire where to stop , but don't tell me .
 
.
 They were discussing this question , and were starting to believe his absence might mean he'd had some success , when they heard him coming up the stairs .
 As soon as he entered the room , it was obvious that there was no hope .
 
.
 Carton and MrLorry looked at each other , devastated .
 
.
 Come , come .
 he said , whimpering miserably .
 Let me get to work .
 Give me my work .
 
.
 When he didn't get an answer he tore at his hair and pounded his feet on the floor like an angry child .
 
.
 Don't torture a poor , sad wretch , he begged them , screaming .
 Give me my work .
 What will happen to us if I don't finish those shoes tonight .
 
.
 All was lost .
 
.
 I'm sure that you do , answered MrLorry .
 Go on .
 
.
 What is it .
 MrLorry asked anxiously .
 
.
 MrLorry held it open in his hand and looked at Carton's face .
 
.
 Why not .
 
.
 Yes .
 
.
 They are not in danger .
 
.
 I hope to Heaven that I will , Carton .
 But how .
 
.
 I'm listening so closely , and with so much confidence that what you say is true , that for the moment I have even forgotten about this problem , MrLorry said , touching the back of the doctor's chair .
 
.
 I will do it .
 
.
 Carton was so passionate and inspiring that it made MrLorry as eager as a young man .
 
.
 I'm sure of it .
 
.
 I should wait for you under any circumstances , yes .
 
.
 You have my travel certificate in your hand with the others , you know , and will save my place .
 Wait for nothing else except to have my place in the carriage filled , then leave for England .
 
.
 With Heaven's help you will .
 Promise me that nothing will make you change the plan that we have agreed on .
 
.
 Nothing , Carton .
 
.
 I will remember it .
 I hope to do my part faithfully .
 
.
 And I hope to do mine .
 Now , goodbye .
 
.
 This was his state of mind before it had grown dark on the night Darnay was condemned .
 He was allowed to buy a light and some things to write with , and he sat down to write until the time when the prison lamps had to be put out .
 
.
 He wrote a similar letter to Dr .
 Manette , telling the doctor specifically that he left Lucie and their daughter in his care .
 He was very adamant about this and hoped this responsibility would lift him out of any hopelessness or dangerous reflection that Darnay thought he might fall into .
 
.
 He had time to finish these letters before the lamps were all put out .
 When he lied down on his straw bed , he thought that his life was over .
 
.
 Twelve o'clock came and was gone forever .
 
.
 A key turned in the lock in the door .
 Before the door opened , or as it was being opened , a man said quietly in English , He has never seen me here .
 I have kept out of his way .
 Go in alone .
 I'll wait nearby .
 Don't waste any time .
 
.
 There was something so cheerful and unusual about his expression that at first Darnay thought he was imagining things .
 But then Carton spoke , and it was Carton's real voice .
 He took Darnay's hand , and Darnay could feel his real grasp .
 
.
 Of all the people on earth , am I the last person you expected to see .
 he said .
 
.
 Darnay shook his hand .
 
.
 I bring a request from her .
 
.
 What is it .
 
.
 Darnay turned his face to the side .
 
.
 Carton , there is no way to escape this place .
 It will never work .
 You will only be killed along with me .
 This is crazy .
 
.
 Very quickly and with a physical strength and a mental focus that seemed supernatural , Carton made him do all these things .
 Darnay was like a young child in his hands .
 
.
 Do I ask you , Darnay , to go out the door .
 When I ask that , you can refuse .
 There's a pen , ink , and paper on this table .
 Is your hand steady enough for you to write .
 
.
 It was when you came in .
 
.
 Steady it again and write down what I say .
 Quickly , my friend .
 
.
 Write exactly what I say .
 
.
 To whom should I address it .
 
.
 To no one .
 Carton still had his hand in his breast pocket .
 
.
 Should I date it .
 
.
 No .
 
.
 ëIf you remember what we said to each other long ago , you will understand this when you read it , ' Carton dictated .
 ëYou do remember it , I know .
 It is not in your nature to forget it .
 '
.
 Have you written ëforget it' yet .
 asked Carton .
 
.
 I have .
 Is that a weapon in your hand .
 
.
 No .
 I am unarmed .
 
.
 What's in your hand .
 
.
 Darnay dropped the pen onto the table and looked around him , dazed .
 
.
 What is that vapor .
 he asked .
 
.
 Vapor .
 
.
 Did I inhale something .
 
.
 I'm not aware of anything .
 There can't be anything here .
 Pick up the pen and finish .
 Hurry , hurry .
 
.
 Hurry , hurry .
 
.
 Darnay bent over the paper again .
 
.
 Carton didn't move his hand back to his breast pocket anymore .
 Darnay jumped up with an accusing look , but Carton was holding his hand firmly up to his nostrils .
 Carton's left arm caught him around the waist , and for a few seconds Darnay tried to fight with Carton , who had come to lay down his life for him .
 But within a minute or so , Darnay was stretched out on the ground , unconscious .
 
.
 MrCarton , answered Barsad , snapping his fingers timidly , this business doesn't put me in danger if you stay true to your side of the deal .
 
.
 Don't be afraid of me .
 I will be true until my death .
 
.
 You have to be , MrCarton , if fifty-two people are to die .
 If you go through with it dressed like that , I shall have nothing to fear .
 
.
 You .
 asked Barsad , nervously .
 
.
 Him , man , whom I have changed places with .
 Do you go out at the same gate you brought me in through .
 
.
 Of course .
 
.
 Tell them I was weak and faint when you brought me in and I am fainter now that you are taking me out .
 Tell them my final conversation with Darnay was too much for me .
 Such a thing has happened here oftentoo often .
 Your life is in your own hands .
 Quick .
 Call for help .
 
.
 You swear not to betray me .
 said Barsad , trembling as he paused for a moment .
 
.
 What happened .
 asked one of them , looking at the man who had fallen down .
 He's troubled to find out that his friend is being sent to the guillotine .
 
.
 A good patriot could hardly have been more upset if this nobleman had been released .
 
.
 We're running out of time , Evremonde , Barsad said to Carton in a warning voice .
 
.
 I know , answered Carton .
 Please take care of my friend and leave me alone .
 
.
 Come on , boys , said Barsad .
 Lift him up and come this way .
 
.
 Then he heard sounds , but he wasn't afraid of them because he knew what they meant .
 Several doors opened one after another , and finally his own door opened .
 A jailer with a list in his hand looked inside .
 All he said was , Follow me , Evremonde .
 Carton followed him into a large , dark room that was far away .
 It was a dark winter day .
 The shadows inside and outside made it difficult to see the other people who were brought there to have their arms tied .
 Some were standing up and some were seated .
 A few of them were crying and some were moving around nervously .
 But most of them were silent and still , staring at the ground .
 
.
 He murmured , That's right .
 I forgetwhat were you accused of .
 
.
 Plots .
 Though Heaven knows that I am innocent .
 Is it likely .
 Who would think of plotting with a poor , little weak creature like me .
 
.
 She smiled sadly when she said it , and he was so touched that he started to tear up .
 
.
 He was moved by this poor girl , and she was the last thing on earth that would move him .
 
.
 I heard you were released , Citizen Evremonde .
 I hoped it was true .
 
.
 It was .
 But I was arrested again and condemned to die .
 
.
 If I can ride in the same cart as you , Citizen Evremonde , will you let me hold your hand .
 I'm not afraid , but I am little and weak and it will give me more courage .
 
.
 As the girl looked up into his face , he saw that she suddenly doubted whether he was actually who he said .
 She looked astonished , and he kissed her young fingers , which were worn from years of poverty .
 
.
 Are you dying for him .
 she whispered .
 
.
 Oh , will you let me hold your hand , brave stranger .
 
.
 Hush .
 Yes , my dear .
 To the very end .
 
.
 ***
.
 The people inside the coach handed the guard the papers and he read them .
 
.
 Alexandre Manette .
 Doctor .
 French .
 Which one is he .
 
.
 They pointed out the confused old man .
 He was mumbling incoherently .
 
.
 Apparently the citizen doctor is not in his right mind .
 The Revolution fever was too much for him .
 
.
 It was far too much for him .
 
.
 They pointed her out .
 
.
 It must be .
 Lucie .
 She's Evremonde's wife , isn't she .
 
.
 She is , they answered .
 
.
 This is she .
 
.
 Kiss me , daughter of Evremonde , the guard said to her .
 Now you have kissed a good Republican .
 That's something new to your family .
 Remember it .
 Sydney Carton .
 Lawyer .
 English , the guard read .
 Which one is he .
 
.
 He was lying in a corner of the carriage .
 They pointed him out too .
 
.
 Apparently the English lawyer has fainted .
 
.
 We hope he will recover from the fresh air .
 He isn't well and is upset to be separated from a friend who has angered the Republic .
 
.
 Is that all .
 That's no big deal .
 Many have angered the Republic and must look out of the little windows of the prisons .
 Jarvis Lorry .
 Banker .
 English , read the guard .
 Which one is he .
 
.
 It was Jarvis Lorry who had answered all the previous questions .
 It was Jarvis Lorry who got out and stood with his hand on the coach door , answering the group of officials .
 The guards slowly walked around the carriage and climbed up on top to look at what little luggage there was on the roof .
 The country people were hanging around , pressing nearer to the coach doors and staring into it greedily .
 A small child in its mother's arms was reaching out so that it could touch the wife of an aristocrat who had been killed by the guillotine .
 
.
 We can leave , citizen .
 
.
 You can leave .
 Move forward , postilions a person riding one of the horses in a team drawing a carriage postilions .
 Have a good journey .
 
.
 Aren't we going too slowly .
 Can't we make them go faster .
 asked Lucie , clinging to her father .
 
.
 It would look like we were running away if we did .
 We can't make them go too fast .
 It would look suspicious .
 
.
 Look back and see if they are chasing us .
 
.
 The road is empty , my dear .
 So far they are not chasing us .
 
.
 Ho .
 You inside the carriage .
 Speak .
 
.
 What is it .
 asked MrLorry , looking out the window .
 
.
 How many did they say .
 
.
 I don't understand you .
 
.
 At the last post .
 How many did they say were sent to the guillotine today .
 
.
 Fifty-two .
 
.
 That's what I said .
 A good number .
 My fellow citizen here said it was forty-two .
 There are ten more people than that who deserve to have their heads cut off today .
 The guillotine works well .
 I love it .
 Then he yelled at the horses , Forward .
 Whoop .
 
.
 But Monsieur Defarge is a good Republican without a doubt , isn't he .
 asked Jacques Three .
 
.
 There isn't a better Republican in France , the talkative Vengeance said in her shrill voice .
 
.
 Madame Defarge looked down and thought a little .
 
.
 The child also has blond hair and blue eyes , said Jacques Three , thoughtfully enjoying his words .
 We rarely have a child sent to the guillotine .
 It's a pretty sight .
 
.
 In a word , said Madame Defarge , getting back onto the subject , I can't trust my husband about this .
 Since last night I've felt that I can't trust him with the details of my plans .
 I also feel that if I delay he could warn them , and then they might escape .
 
.
 That must never happen , said Jacques Three hoarsely .
 No one must escape .
 We don't have enough people dying as it is .
 We should have a hundred and twenty people sent to the guillotine every day .
 
.
 The wood sawyer , who was deathly afraid of Madame Defarge , came forward clutching his red cap .
 
.
 About those signals that she made to the prisoners , little citizen , said Madame Defarge sternly .
 Are you ready to swear to them today .
 
.
 He made all sorts of gestures as he spoke , as if he were imitating a few of the different signals that he had never actually seen Lucie make .
 
.
 Clearly they were forming plots , said Jacques Three .
 It couldn't be more clear .
 
.
 You can count on the patriotic jury , citizeness .
 I speak for my fellow jurymen .
 
.
 Now , let me see , said Madame Defarge , thinking it over again .
 Let me think it over just once more .
 Can I let this doctor live for my husband's sake .
 I don't care either way .
 Can I spare him .
 
.
 He would be one more head , said Jacques Three quietly .
 We really don't have enough heads as it is .
 It would be a pity to let him live , I think .
 
.
 The Vengeance and Jacques Three both tried to outdo each other in saying that she was the most admirable and marvelous witness .
 The little wood sawyer didn't want to be outdone and called her a celestial witness .
 
.
 He must take his chances , said Madame Defarge .
 No , I cannot spare him .
 You are busy at three o'clock .
 You are going to see the people who are to be executed today .
 You .
 
.
 I will be doing the same thing there , said madame .
 After it's overlet's say at eight o'clock tonightcome to see me in Saint Antoine and we will go accuse these people at my Section .
 
.
 Madame Defarge beckoned to Jacques Three and The Vengeance to come closer to the door , and then she elaborated on her thoughts : 
.
 I'll be there before they begin .
 
.
 She didn't care that an innocent man was about to die for the sins of his ancestors .
 She saw them , not him .
 She didn't care that his wife was about to become a widow and his daughter an orphan .
 That wasn't enough punishment , because they were her natural enemies and prey , and so they had no right to live .
 It was useless to appeal to her , since she had no pity , even for herself .
 If she had been struck down in the streets in one of the many battles she had been involved in , she wouldn't have pitied herself .
 If she were sent to the guillotine to die tomorrow , she wouldn't feel anything but a strong desire to see the person who sent her there killed instead .
 
.
 I think you're right , miss , answered MrCruncher .
 Either way , I'll do what you want , right or wrong .
 
.
 I am so troubled with fear and hope for our friends that I am unable to form a plan , said Miss Pross , crying wildly .
 Are you able to form any plan , MrCruncher .
 
.
 I hope I will be able to in the future , answered MrCruncher .
 Right now , I'm not able to think of anything .
 Would you do me a favor , miss , and listen to two promises and vows that I want to have on record here in this crisis .
 
.
 Whatever situation you have at home , said Miss Pross , trying to dry her eyes and compose herself , I know it's best that MrsCruncher is able to do what she wants .
 Oh , my poor friends .
 
.
 Meanwhile , Madame Defarge was still making her way through the streets and getting closer and closer .
 
.
 If we ever get back to England , said Miss Pross , you can rely on my telling MrsCruncher as much as I can remember and understand of what you have so impressively said .
 You can be sure that I will swear that you were completely serious about it at the time .
 Now , please , let's think of a plan .
 My good MrCruncher , let's think .
 
.
 Madame Defarge was still making her way through the streets and getting closer and closer .
 
.
 Wouldn't it be best if you went on ahead , stopped the horses and carriage from coming here , and then waited for me somewhere else .
 asked Miss Pross .
 
.
 MrCruncher thought that was best .
 
.
 Where could you wait for me .
 asked Miss Pross .
 
.
 The door of Notre Dame cathedral , said Miss Pross .
 Would it be too much out of your way to meet me near the big cathedral door between the two towers .
 
.
 No , miss , answered MrCruncher .
 
.
 Then go to the posting house right away , like a good man , and change our arrangements , said Miss Pross .
 
.
 I am worried about leaving you .
 We don't know what could happen , said MrCruncher , hesitating and shaking his head .
 
.
 The basin fell and broke on the ground , and the water flowed to the feet of Madame Defarge .
 Many strange circumstances and much spilling of blood had brought her feet there .
 
.
 You look like you could be the devil's wife , said Miss Pross , breathing heavily .
 Even so , you won't get the better of me .
 I am an Englishwoman .
 
.
 Madame Defarge looked at her with contempt , but she understood along with Miss Pross that they were challenging one another .
 Madame Defarge saw a tight , hard , wiry woman in front of her .
 She noticed the same things that MrLorry had noticed about her many years ago .
 She knew very well that Miss Pross was a devoted friend to the Manette family , and Miss Pross knew very well that Madame Defarge was an enemy of the Manette family .
 
.
 It won't help Lucie to hide from me right now , said Madame Defarge .
 Good patriots will know what it means if she does .
 Let me see her .
 Go tell her that I want to see her .
 Do you hear me .
 
.
 If your eyes were bed winches a machine for lifting loads made of a rope or chain wound around a cylinder bed winches and I was an English four-poster bed , they wouldn't get a splinter out of me .
 No , you wicked , foreign woman .
 I am your match .
 
.
 You stupid pig .
 said Madame Defarge , frowning .
 You're not answering me .
 I demand to see her .
 Either tell her that I demand to see her or get out of the way of the door and let me go see her myself .
 She waved her right arm angrily as she said this .
 
.
 I am British , said Miss Pross .
 I am desperate , and I don't care two pennies for myself .
 I know that the longer I keep you here , the greater the hope is for Lucie .
 I will tear all of your dark hair clean off your head if you lay a finger on me .
 
.
 As Miss Pross spoke , she shook her head , glaring at Madame Defarge and taking a breath between every quick sentence .
 Miss Pross had threatened her , though she had never hit anyone in her life .
 
.
 Maybe it was the silence that followed , or the expression on Miss Pross's face , or a sudden worry that had nothing to do with either , but something made Madame Defarge think that they might all be gone .
 She opened three of the doors quickly and looked into the other rooms .
 
.
 Never .
 said Miss Pross , who understood the request as perfectly as Madame Defarge understood the answer .
 
.
 As long as you don't learn whether they are in that room or not , you won't know what to do , Miss Pross thought .
 And you won't learn that if I can help it .
 Whether you know that or not , you will stay here as long as I can keep you here .
 
.
 Madame Defarge moved toward the door .
 Miss Pross instinctively grabbed her around the waist with both arms and held onto her tightly .
 It was pointless for Madame Defarge to struggle and hit at her .
 Miss Pross held on to her tightly with the strength of love , which is always much stronger than hate .
 She even lifted her up off the floor while they struggled , and Madame Defarge beat and tore at Miss Pross's face with her hands .
 Miss Pross kept her head down and held her around her waist , clinging to her with the force of a drowning woman .
 
.
 All of this happened in a second , and there was an awful stillness as the smoke cleared .
 The smoke moved through the air like the soul of Madame Defarge , whose body lied lifeless on the ground .
 
.
 Is there any noise in the streets .
 she asked him .
 
.
 The usual noises , answered MrCruncher .
 He was surprised by the question and surprised by the way she looked .
 
.
 I didn't hear you , said Miss Pross .
 What did you say .
 
.
 Is there any noise in the streets now .
 asked Miss Pross again .
 
.
 MrCruncher nodded his head again .
 
.
 I don't hear it .
 
.
 Has she gone deaf in the last hour .
 MrCruncher asked himself , thinking it over , disturbed .
 What's happened to her .
 
.
 I feel as if there was a flash and a crash , and that crash was the last thing I'll ever hear in my life , said Miss Pross .
 
.
 If she can't hear the rolling of those dreadful carts , which are now very close to their journey's end , said MrCruncher , looking over his shoulder , I think that she will never hear anything else in this world .
 
.
 And indeed she never did .
 
.
 The empty death carts rumble harshly along the streets of Paris .
 Six carts carry the prisoners who are to be executed that day to the guillotine .
 The guillotine is like all of the devouring , ravenous monsters that have ever been imagined , combined into one .
 And yet even in France , with its rich soil and good weather , there isn't a blade of grass , a leaf , a root , a sprig , or a single peppercorn that will grow to maturity more predictably than the Revolution did .
 If people are beaten down again like this , the same horrible thing will happen .
 If greed and oppression are allowed to grow again , it will produce a similar result .
 
.
 Barsad and the other prison spies wait for the tumbrils on the steps of the church .
 He looks into the first tumbril , but he's not there .
 He looks into the second one too , but he's not there .
 He's already wondering , Has he betrayed me .
 Then he looks into the third tumbril and feels relieved as he sees him .
 
.
 Which one is Evremonde .
 asks a man behind him .
 
.
 That one .
 At the back there .
 
.
 Holding the girl's hand .
 
.
 Yes .
 
.
 The man yells , Down with Evremonde .
 Send all aristocrats to the guillotine .
 Down with Evremonde .
 
.
 Hush , hush .
 Barsad says to him timidly .
 
.
 And why not , citizen .
 
.
 Therese .
 she yells in her shrill voice .
 Has anyone seen her .
 Therese Defarge .
 
.
 She's never missed an execution before , says another of the knitting women .
 
.
 Yell louder , suggests the other woman .
 
.
 The second tumbril empties and moves on .
 The third comes up .
 There is a crash .
 The knitting women , who never stop knitting , count two .
 
.
 Or you to me , says Sydney Carton .
 Keep looking at me , dear child , and don't worry about anything else .
 
.
 I don't worry about anything while I hold your hand .
 I won't worry about anything when I let it go either , if they kill me quickly .
 
.
 They will be quick .
 Don't be afraid .
 
.
 What is it .
 
.
 What then , my gentle sister .
 
.
 It won't seem long , my dear child .
 There is no time in Heaven , and no troubles there .
 
.
 You are so comforting to me .
 I am so ignorant .
 Should I kiss you now .
 Is it time .
 
.
 Yes .
 
.
 ***
.
 It was said in Paris that night that Carton had the most peaceful look on his face that anyone had ever seen on someone sent to the guillotine .
 Many people added that he looked almost heavenly , and like a prophet .
 
.
 One of the most remarkable people who died that same day at the guillotine was a woman who had asked at the foot of that same scaffold earlier if she could write down what she was thinking .
 If Carton had said what he had been thinking , and if he had been able to see into the future , he would have said this : 
.
 I see Barsad , Cly , Defarge , The Vengeance , Jacques Three the juryman , the judge , the many new tyrants that have taken over after destroying the old , all dying at the guillotine , before it stops being used .
 I see the beautiful city of Paris and the wonderful people of France rising up from this abyss , In their struggles to be truly free , in their triumphs and defeats for many years to come , I see the evil of this time , and the evil of the time before that caused the Revolution , gradually making amends for itself and dying out .
 
.
 It is a far , far better thing that I do than I have ever done .
 It is a far , far better rest that I go to than I have ever known .
 .
